Environ Geol (2005) 49: 188–206 DOI 10.1007/s00254-005-0011-5 ORIGINAL ARTICLE D. Chatterjee R. K. Roy Riddle of arsenic in groundwater of Bengal B. B. Basu Delta Plain—role of non-inland source and redox traps Abstract In the Bengal Delta Plain dation in pre-existing land depres- Received: 22 September 2004 Accepted: 26 April 2005 (BDP) the primary arsenic sourcing sions. Meanwhile arsenic Published online: 15 September 2005 appears to be diﬀerent from the entrapments through marine incur-  Springer-Verlag 2005 global scenario. Here, the Terminal sion as well as enrichment in the Pleistocene–Holocene depositional presence of organic carbon/DOC platform, the interactive early and/or Fe/Mn/Al catalytic agents Holocene depositional morphology could have developed into localised with ﬂuvio-estuarine and marine redox traps. It may be of relevance incursions played a crucial role for that due to the repetitive transgres- arsenic sourcing and enrichment. sive–regressive phases in Holocene, The lenticular silt-ﬁne sand layer resulting in periodic exposure and between anoxic clay beds favoured weathering of iron-bearing minerals entrapment of dissolved organic and consequent iron enrichment in carbon with decayed phyto-plank- the aquifer system. The iron, thus D. Chatterjee tons debris. The Terminal Pleisto- present, had free charge to host ar- Department of Chemistry, senic as a sink. It appears that ar- Kalyani University, cene–Holocene transgression and West Bengal, India regression processes may have acted senic, wherever found, would likely as major events in the BDP. Inter- be of atypical localised exhaustible D. Chatterjee Arsenic Research Cell, estingly, at the end of the last glacial phenomenon, both in horizontal and School of Fundamental Research, maxima, the Pleistocene delta had vertical context. It also rationalises Kolkata 700026, India undergone block movements, the cause of the absence of arsenic in R. K. Roy wherein some parts of the platform the other nearby Pleistocene plat- Former of Geological Survey of India, were raised above the level of form, which has not come across Government of India, India Holocene deposition. Those blocks Holocene interaction and marine B. B. Basu Æ R. K. Roy were found to be free from arsenic in incursion, as to the likely limiting Arsenic Technology Park, the groundwater. The sea, during re- condition for the search for arsenic Baruipur, India emerging inundation (10–7 ka BP), in the BDP or beyond. B. B. Basu (&) has witnessed a monsoon-induced School of Fundamental Research, 29, environment in the BDP with the Keywords Arsenic Æ Bengal Delta Pratapaditya Road, resultant oscillation of sea level Plain (BDP) Æ Terminal Kolkata 700 026, India Pleistocene–Holocene Æ E-mail: biplabbb@gmail.com leading to higher upsurge towards Tel.: +91-33-24630307 the north. This might have resulted Marine incursion Æ DOC Fax: +91-33-24664317 in the marine incursion and inun- 189 Introduction Holocene sediment pile as there was slow and diﬀeren- tial sinking of the delta platform and its wide sea front. The presence of arsenic in the groundwater of the Bengal There is no other coastal-deltaic segment of Indian coast Delta Plain (BDP) is known for more than two decades. which can match the dimensions of sinking and sedi- In the western part (West Bengal, India), arsenic is mentation rate of the BDP. mostly occurring in pockets or patches, restricted to the Many researchers have assumed that arsenic must meander belt of Bhagirathi and the other associated have been sourced through physical weathering of ar- deltaic distributaries, and interspersed with non-con- senic-bearing mineral occurrences in the crystalline and taminated areas. The aquifers of the BDP are seemingly meta-sedimentaries of the Himalayas. The weathered free from thermal springs and volcanic materials (lava product was brought down to the BDP environment and ash), although doubtful presence of Youngest Toba during little ice age at the Terminal Pleistocene–Holo- Ash (YTA: 74.0 ka BP) is reported from two localities cene transition period by the seasonal melt and monsoon (Acharyya et al. 2000). Moreover, the sediment se- water along the progressively widening valleys, incised quence constituting the aquifers is practically free of into the Pleistocene platform. It is a logical possibility arsenic-bearing minerals (Acharyya et al. 1999), and that weathered products from the provenance areas of that may cause a high level of arsenic contamination in the BDP were rapidly transported down the high gra- the groundwater. dient of the major river channels well inside the sea, In the BDP meso- and micro-level landforms and the away from the present day sea front and even beyond sediments are the products of the inland–ﬂuvial or the submerged Pleistocene platform. This assumption estuarine–marine depositional regime or of a dynamic was also supported by another research group (McAr- interaction between the two. Thus, the area is adorned thur et al. 2004). with various geomorphic features, such as tidal swamps The authors of this paper would like to visualise the (long duration waterlogged areas rich in humus), sourcing of arsenic from non-inland marine route in the interdistributary inland swamps (seasonal waterlog- sediment packet of the BDP, which was deposited on ging—lesser organic matter with silt and/or clay). The the Terminal Pleistocene platform, primarily through surfacial and near surface (30–50 m bls) lithic frame- the oscillatory marine transgression and regression work of the BDP indicate that the Holocene delta is processes starting from 12 ka BP. It is also important to mostly made up of ﬁne-grained micaceous channel ﬁll note that if iron and arsenic arrived in the BDP only and even ﬁner ﬂoodplain and estuarine–marine sedi- through the inland route, then there ought to be a co- ments. Throughout the Holocene, the BDP seems to relationship regarding their presence in the host sedi- have hosted sedimentation on an uneven marine–estua- ment. Through a repetitive study (n‡50) at a number of rine–ﬂuvial platform between the tidal marine lower sites (16) over a longer period of 2.5 years, the authors part, non-marine valley margin fan to the west and the have also observed poor or non-relationship of As–Fe in Pleistocene terrace and piedmont fan at the apex of the BDP sediments. The arsenic sourcing has been shown in delta. Redox conditions which repeatedly developed on this paper through the non-inland or marine route into the swamps in geological timescale could be the active the entrapped pore-water and sediments that constitute agents of metal deposition and isolation. the Holocene tidal–estuarine–marine sediment packet. It In the Indian subcontinent and in the world, arsenic can also be said that the areas beyond the BDP, wher- is not found in the Pleistocene sedimentary processes ever arsenic is currently seen, may its origin be in the and material. In fact, crust materials in any of the older deposits of speciﬁc localised nature and shall also have a sedimentary sequences of post-Cambrian age do not very restricted inﬂuence zone. contain arsenic mineral deposits in India. Even the older and younger crustal rocks (meta-sedimentaries and sedimentaries) of pre-Cambrian age do not host arsenic Areas of concern minerals in such quantities that can cause the recorded elevated level of arsenic presence in the groundwater of World scenario the BDP. The Holocene sedimentation, wherever it occurred in A close examination of world arsenic in the groundwater the BDP between 17 and 3 ka BP, has witnessed and was scenario reveals that no primary source could be deﬁ- inﬂuenced by several phases of sea-level ﬂuctuation and nitely established from the deltaic areas (reducing envi- the prime depocentres were localised along and around ronment: BDP, Mekong, Red river). On the other hand, the coastal belt. The inland depocentres, except the primary sources have been recognised in the volcanic foredeep belt, had a thin sediment column as there was material (Argentina, Mexico), geo-thermal springs no signiﬁcant active mechanism in such areas to (USA, Japan, Chile, New Zealand), mineralised belt accommodate thicker deposits. On the other hand, the (Ghana, Thailand, Greece) and coal (China). In this southern part of the BDP could host good thicknesses of context, it may be mentioned that in BDP there is no Table 1 World context of arsenic in ground water 190 No. Country/region Morphological Water source Aquifer Arsenic concen- Water character- Sources (suggestive, established) Remarks Reference unit material tration istic Surface: lake/ Groundwater Primary Secondary Environment pond/river condition 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1 Argentina: Chaco- Quaternary – Unconﬁned Loess (silt size pH 6.3–9.2 in Volcanic Loess, sedi- Temperate to As well corre- Nicolli et al. Pampean Plain plain: made up material) with loess glass in ash ment and semi-arid: sponds with Fe, (1989), Smedley of loess inter- iron and cal- volcanic oxidising Mn and trace et al. (1998) and mixed with rhy- crete as nodules ash elements in Nicolli and olitic and with Fe and Mn oxide and Merino (2002) dacitic volcanic oxides hydroxide material forms Cordaba 255 pH 7.0–8.7 in ash La Pampa 145 Fe and Mn hydroxides Santa Fe 720 HCO3 and trace of F, V, B and Mo Tucuman 48 Buenos Aires (avg. value in lg l)1) 2 Northern Chile Antofagasta, Ca- Arid plain River Unconﬁned Volcanic rock, 440 lg l)1 (avg.) High salinity and Volcanic Volcanic oxidising (dis- 7% of all deaths Smith et al. lama, Tocopila ash and sedi- boron material rocks and solved O2 in in Antofagasta (1998) Township and ments sediments groundwater) relates to As surrounding (As plain 3.2 mg; kg)1) El Tatio geother- Geothermal ﬁeld Geothermal Geothermal Cu-ore smelter 50–120 lg l)1 Highly saline Geothermal Geochemistry of Caceres et al. mal ﬁeld in a basin at springs and springs waste (Na: 2,000– source aquifer un- (1992) 4,250 amsl water pools 5,000 mg l)1) known White et al. (1963) 3 Mexico Lagunera Region: Arid plains – Unconﬁned and 100 lg l)1 (avg.) pH 6.3–8.9; high Volcanic ash Loess and Oxidising Positive correla- Del Razo et al. North Central locally conﬁned F (3.7 lg l)1) volcanic tion with high F (1990) part ash Sonora: NW part 305 lg l)1 (max.) pH 7.5–8.9; F Wyatt et al. (up to (1998) 7.4 lg l)1) )1 4 Hungary Great-alluvial Shallow uncon- Quaternary sedi- 32 lg l (avg.) Ca–Mg–HCO3 Not known Alluvium Moderately Deeper aquifer Varsanyi et al. plain: a slow ﬁned and dee- ments: ﬁne type in recharge oxidising at rich in humic (1991) subsidising re- per conﬁned grained sand area to Na– shallow depth acid gion with and clay alter- HCO3 type in and reducing depressions nation deeper parts of in the deeper basin with Fe aquifers (80– and NH con- 560 m) centration Romania Clay with organ- <176 lg l)1 Na–HCO3 type Gurzau and ic matter at Gurzau (2001) depth (+100 m) 5 Greece: Lavrion Hummocks, ped- Unconﬁned Soil and weath- – – Pyrite and Soil, water, Oxidising – Komnitsas et al. region iplain of min- ered rock and arsenopy- plant (1995) eralised rock Pb–Ag miner- rite miner- and weathered alisation alisation soil Table 1 (Contd.) No. Country/region Morphological Water source Aquifer Arsenic concen- Water character- Sources (suggestive, established) Remarks Reference unit material tration istic Surface: lake/ Groundwater Primary Secondary Environment pond/river condition 6 Taiwan Gently undulat- Conﬁned Fine sand, silt and Details not Not deﬁned Sediments Reducing 58 towns out of ing upland with dark grey clay known yet with org. 177 in the SW coastal plain carbon rich have As(III) mud (black >350 lg l)1 in clay) GW; open well <50 lg l)1 SW province Deep artesian 10–1,800 lg l)1, Hsu et al. (1987) wells (100– 500 lg l)1 280 m) (avg.) NE province Shallow artesian 135 lg l)1 (avg.) Chen et al. wells (16–40 m) (1994) 7 China Inner Mongolia Ba Men region Dried up lake Conﬁned and Holocene alluvial Up to 556 lg l)1 Shallow aquifer Not known Holocene Highly reduc- As(V) is 10–30% Luo et al. (1957) and Tumet area locally and lacustrine in shallow and saline and lo- alluvial and ing and As(III) 70– plain: Hunhot unconﬁned aquifer 1,500 lg l)1 in cally rich in lacustrine 90% basin the deeper ﬂuorine deposits aquifer rich in clay; sediments Xinjiang (a) Dzungaria Lake water; (a) Conﬁned Quaternary (a) 40–750 lg l)1 (a) Reducing; (a) As(III) high Wang and Province basin, N of surface water (deeper) and sediments in deeper and in deeper con- Huang (1994) Tianshan unconﬁned up to 660 m ﬁned aquifer Mountain; (shallow) and <68 lg l)1 (660 m) and less in shallow; in shallow (b) Aibi lake; (b) 175 lg l)1 ; (b) Lake water (b) and (c) ox- unconﬁned saline; idising aquifer )1 (c) river and (c) 30 lg l (c) fresh ﬂowing streams water Shanxi province (a) Saline lake – (a) 175 lg l)1 ; )1 water; (b) river (b) 10–30 lg l water 8 Vietnam Red river Delta plain with Unconﬁned Deltaic sediments: 159 lg l)1 (avg.) High Fe, Mn and Acid sul- Deltaic sedi- Reducing As(III) content Berg et al. interdistributary shallow; and clay, sand, silt NH4 phate soil ments rich in tubewell (2001), Larsson swamps semi-conﬁned alternations produced in clay and (lowest in early (1996) deeper (>200 m) Holo- by pyrite organic monsoon

 active mechanism in such areas to (USA, Japan, Chile, New Zealand), mineralised belt accommodate thicker deposits. On the other hand, the (Ghana, Thailand, Greece) and coal (China). In this southern part of the BDP could host good thicknesses of context, it may be mentioned that in BDP there is no Table 1 World context of arsenic in ground water 190 No. Country/region Morphological Water source Aquifer Arsenic concen- Water character- Sources (suggestive, established) Remarks Reference unit material tration istic Surface: lake/ Groundwater Primary Secondary Environment pond/river condition 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1 Argentina: Chaco- Quaternary – Unconﬁned Loess (silt size pH 6.3–9.2 in Volcanic Loess, sedi- Temperate to As well corre- Nicolli et al. Pampean Plain plain: made up material) with loess glass in ash ment and semi-arid: sponds with Fe, (1989), Smedley of loess inter- iron and cal- volcanic oxidising Mn and trace et al. (1998) and mixed with rhy- crete as nodules ash elements in Nicolli and olitic and with Fe and Mn oxide and Merino (2002) dacitic volcanic oxides hydroxide material forms Cordaba 255 pH 7.0–8.7 in ash La Pampa 145 Fe and Mn hydroxides Santa Fe 720 HCO3 and trace of F, V, B and Mo Tucuman 48 Buenos Aires (avg. value in lg l)1) 2 Northern Chile Antofagasta, Ca- Arid plain River Unconﬁned Volcanic rock, 440 lg l)1 (avg.) High salinity and Volcanic Volcanic oxidising (dis- 7% of all deaths Smith et al. lama, Tocopila ash and sedi- boron material rocks  ional morphology could have developed into localised with ﬂuvio-estuarine and marine redox traps. It may be of relevance incursions played a crucial role for that due to the repetitive transgres- arsenic sourcing and enrichment. sive–regressive phases in Holocene, The lenticular silt-ﬁne sand layer resulting in periodic exposure and between anoxic clay beds favoured weathering of iron-bearing minerals entrapment of dissolved organic and consequent iron enrichment in carbon with decayed phyto-plank- the aquifer system. The iron, thus D. Chatterjee tons debris. The Terminal Pleisto- present, had free charge to host ar- Department of Chemistry, senic as a sink. It appears that ar- Kalyani University, cene–Holocene transgression and West Bengal, India regression processes may have acted senic, wherever found, would likely as major events in the BDP. Inter- be of atypical localised exhaustible D. Chatterjee Arsenic Research Cell, estingly, at the end of the last glacial phenomenon, both in horizontal and School of Fundamental Research, maxima, the Pleistocene delta had vertical context. It also rationalises Kolkata 700026, India undergone block movements, the cause of the absence of arsenic in R. K. Roy wherein some parts of the platform the other nearby Pleistocene plat- Former of Geological Survey of India, were raised above the level of form, which has not come across Government of India, India Holocene deposition. Those blocks Holocene interaction and marine B. B. Basu Æ R. K. Roy w senic. It thus appears that the clastic sediment source sidered as provenance of arsenic (Acharyya et al. 1999; cannot be the only source of arsenic in the BDP, McArthur et al. 2003, 2004; Akai et al. 2004) and once especially in the areas to the south and east of the the source is so assumed, then discussion followed on the Hinge zone which has been the principal domain of transport mechanism of arsenic in BDP aquifers via the marine–estuarine–tidal–ﬂuvial transition during the sediment-aqua transit route. The solute transportation Holocene where arsenic concentration in groundwater of iron-rich sediment along with sorbed arsenic(V) has is higher than the area to the west. been visualised in many ways to understand the pro- cesses of erosion and weathering (BGS and DPHE 2001; Smedly and Kinniburgh 2002). Recently, McArthur Role of geo-chemistry and iron in the BDP opined that ‘‘The Holocene sediments in Bengal Basin derives from Himalayan rocks that are (mostly) igneous Most researchers had opined that iron oxides are be- and metamorphic. ... The aquifer sands largely derive lieved to be critical in the BDP and they are common from erosion at a time of extended glaciation in the secondary minerals formed by the weathering of iron- Himalayas when physical weathering dominated and the containing primary minerals. In the absence of unusual intensity of chemical weathering was limited by low and high arsenic source points (mineralised area), it (glacial) temperature during erosion. The im lay bed, swamps local hydraulic continuity be- tween the two Mekong delta Up to Saline shallow Ngynen (1998) 3,050 lg l)1 aquifer, high Fe, Mn and NH4 9 USA California: (i) Geothermal Madison river Hot spring dis- Deep seated frac- Highly variable High alkalinity Volcanic Mobilisation Oxidising and Concentration of Welch et al Honey lake ba- springs charges into tures and volcanic 2,500 lg l)1 (pH 8.3), high sources and through locally reduc- As more in hot (2000) sin; (ii) Coso river ﬁssures (Long valley); Cl (800 lg l)1) interior of water and ing due to spring from Hot Spring; (iii) 7,800 to and B in some earth water va- presence of volcanic prov- Imperial valley; 1,500 lg l)1 (e.g., Long pour CO and NH4 ince and in gey- (iv) Long valley; (Imperial valley) sers than in hot (v) Lassen Vol- valley) springs else- canic Park where 191 Table 1 (Contd.) 192 Nevada: (i) Hot spring Flow under Up to Oxidising Thompson and Steamboat pressure 2,700 lg l)1 Demonge Spring; (ii) Yel- (1996) low stone Na- tional Park Mono Lake Lake fed by geo- Lake water – Lake water 20 lg l)1 Feebly oxidis- thermal spring ing Madison R. Groundwater fed River water – Surface water Locally up to Feebly saline due Hot spring dis- Evaporation Oxidising stream enriched 370 lg l)1 to alkali salts charges in lake; of lake by geothermal geothermal water; Hot water water spring dis- charges in river Basinal areas of southwestern states Nevada (a) Sedimentary – Unconﬁned Shallow aquifer, >100 lg l)1 high pH 8.0, high P Evapora ts. Igneous rocks, al- Himalayan belt, much above the coarse-grained fan though varying in FeT, have nearly equal proportions of deposits. Hence, the arsenic-bearing minerals from such Fe3+ and Fe2+. In contrast, sedimentary rocks show a sources must be in the process of transit from source to wide range of oxidation states and focuses on the pres- sea through the various morphological segments of the ence of environment of diﬀerent oxidation potential delta. (Wedepohl 1969). While other coastal land and penin- The assumption that arsenic exists in the inland sular India have preponderance of a higher form of iron sedimentary system as detrital grain or ﬁner clastics oxides, the BDP, on the contrary, is mainly hosting a obviously means that the upper surface of the river lower form of iron oxides/hydroxides in the oscillating beds and/or river waters originating from the Himala- format of limonites. yas should have been contaminated with arsenic. If iron had hosted arsenic from Himalayan meta- The arsenic content of bed load sediment samples sediments/peninsular secondary associates and trans- from Ganga (1.2–2.6 mg kg)1), Brahmaputra (1.4– ported to the BDP by the aqua transit route and buried 5.9 mg kg)1) and Meghna (1.3–5.6 mg kg)1) are much in a waterlogged and anoxic environment, then the lower than from BDP bore hole samples (8– chemical feature of the high-arsenic groundwater of the 18 mg kg)1 ; Datta and Subramanian 1998, pp93–101). BDP would have a unique relationship be

 breadth marine inﬂuence. of the BDP and beyond, to clearly deﬁne the terminal interface of the Pleistocene with Holocene and also the localised depressions which transformed into swamps. Conclusion and scope of further studies As arsenic has apparently not been seen in the regional groundwater ﬂow, rather in some pockets within Holo- The studies carried out so far in the BDP demonstrate cene or Terminal Pleistocene–Holocene interface, it that arsenic is likely being trapped in the host environ- further shows that arsenic can be present in such spots ment with iron–manganese–aluminium oxides either in only as a localised exclusive occurrence of ﬁnite quan- the Terminal Pleistocene–Holocene interface or in Late tum. Pilot studies are further required to understand the Holocene depositional sequences. It may desolute under triggering condition at which iron possibly acts as a host redox conditions, thereby releasing arsenic in the or sink to arsenic. Here, the conclusive evidence may be groundwater. In this context, the relevance of iron in the attempted by undertaking speciation study of iron from host environment is of secondary interest, being derived a possible redox trap to non-redox trap site in the similar from the weathering of silicates, oxides and hydroxides, sediment sequence, especially at the interface of the clay, primarily rich in iron. It may also be seen that the silt and sand. 206 References Acharyya SK, Chakraborty P, Lahiri S, Chakrobory D, Mukherjee SC, Pati S, School of Fundamental Research (2003) Ray Mahasaya BC, Guha S, Bhowmik Datta RN, Chatterjee G (2003) SFR Newsletter, VII(6) A (1999) Comments on Nickson et al, Groundwater arsenic in Uttar Pradesh, Smedly PL, Kinniburgh DG (2002) A re- Arsenic poisoning in Ganges delta: the India. Personal communication from view of the source, behaviour and dis- natural contamination of drinking wa- School of Environmental Studies, tribution of arsenic in natural waters. ter by arsenic needs to be urgently ad- Jadavpur University, Kolkata Appl Geochem 17:517–568 dressed. Nature 401:545 Datta DK, Subramanian V (1998) Distri- Stuben D, Berner Z, Chandrasekharan D, Acharyya SK, Lahiri S, Ray Mahasaya BC, bution and fractionation of heavy met- Karmakar J (2003) Arsenic enrichment Bhowmik A (2000) Arsenic toxicity of als in the surface sediments of the in groundwater of West Bengal, India: groundwater in parts of Bengal Basin in Ganges–Brahamputra–Meghna river geochemical evidence for mobilization India and Bangladesh: the role of system in the Bengal Basin. Environ of As under reducing conditions. Appl Quaternary stratigraphy and Holocene. Geol 36:93–101 Geochem 18:1417–1434 Environ Geol 39(10):1127–1137 Goodbred SL, Kuehl S (2000) Late Qua- Subramanian V, van Griken R, van Deek L Akai J, Izumi K, Fukuhara H, Masuda H, ternary stratigraphy and evolution of (1987) Heavy metal in the sediments of Nakano S, Yoshimura T, Ohfuji H, the Ganges–Brahmaputra delta. Sedim Ganges–Brahamaputra river. Environ Hossain MA, Akai K (2004) Minero- Geol 133:229–248 Geol Water Sci 9:93–103 logical and geomicrobiological investi- Krishnan MS (1982) Text book of geology Umitsu M (1993) Late Quaternary sedi- gations on groundwater arsenic of India. Higginbotham, Chennai, India mentary environments and landforms in enrichment in Bangladesh. Appl Geo- McArthur JM, Ravenscoroft P, Saﬁulla S, the Ganges Delta. Sedim Geol 83:177– chem 19:215–230 Thirilwall MF (2003) Arsenic in 186 Appelo CAJ, Postama D (1999) Geochem- groundwater: testing pollution mecha- Von Rad U, Schultz H, den Dulk M, Ber- istry, groundwater and pollution. AA nisms for sedimentary aquifers in Ban- mer U, Sirocko F (1999) Multiple Balkema, Rotterdam gladesh. Water Res 37:109–117 monsoon control breakdown of oxy- Basu BB (2003) Lessons from Arsenic McArthur JM, Banerjee DM, Hudson-Ed- gen—minimum conditions during the Technology Park and critical issues of wards KA, Ravenscoroft P, Purohit R past 30,000 years documented in lami- arsenic mitigation: report. School of (2004) Natural organic matter in sedi- nated sediments of Pakistan. Palaeoge- Fundamental Research, Kolkata, India, mentary basins and its relations to ar- ogr Palaeoclimatol Palaeoecol 152:129– November senic in anoxic groundwater: the 161 BGS and DPHE (2001) Arsenic contami- example of West Bengal and its world Wadia DN (1975) Geology of India. Tata nation of groundwater in Bangladesh, wide implications. Appl Geochem McGraw-Hill, New Delhi, India Vol. 2. British Geological Survey and 19:1255–1293 Wedepohl KH (1969) Handbook of geo- Department of Public Health Engi- Roy RK, Ghosh BK (1981) Neotectonics of chemistry. Springer, Verlag, Heidelberg neering, Bangladesh Southern Ganga valley, Bihar. Pro- New York, 231p ceedings N–Q boundary ﬁeld confer- ence, India. Special Publication of the Geological Survey of India Roy RK, Ghosh BK, Bisaria B (1989) Project Munger: a geoscientiﬁc apprai- sal for rural development. Bull Geol Surv India, Ser B, No. 49