Article pubs.acs.org/est Evidence of Remediation-Induced Alteration of Subsurface Poly- and Perﬂuoroalkyl Substance Distribution at a Former Fireﬁghter Training Area Meghan E. McGuire,† Charles Schaefer,‡ Trenton Richards, ∼ Will J. Backe,§,¥ Jennifer A. Field,⊥ Erika Houtz,∥,¤ David L. Sedlak,∥ Jennifer L. Guelfo,† Assaf Wunsch,† and Christopher P. Higgins*,† † Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Colorado School of Mines, Golden, Colorado 80401, United States ‡ CB&I Federal Services, LLC, Lawrenceville, New Jersey 08648, United States ∼ CB&I Federal Services, Inc., Denver, Colorado 80237, United States See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles. § Department of Chemistry and ⊥Department of Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331, United States ∥ Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720, United States Downloaded via FUDAN UNIV on March 13, 2026 at 06:29:02 (UTC). * S Supporting Information ABSTRACT: Poly- and perﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFASs) are a class of ﬂuorinated chemicals that are utilized in ﬁreﬁghting and have been reported in groundwater and soil at several ﬁreﬁghter training areas. In this study, soil and groundwater samples were collected from across a former ﬁreﬁghter training area to examine the extent to which remedial activities have altered the composition and spatial distribution of PFASs in the subsurface. Log Koc values for perﬂuoroalkyl acids (PFAAs), estimated from analysis of paired samples of groundwater and aquifer solids, indicated that solid/water partitioning was not entirely consistent with predictions based on laboratory studies. Diﬀerential PFAA transport was not strongly evident in the subsurface, likely due to remediation-induced conditions. When compared to the surface soil spatial distributions, the relative concentrations of perﬂuorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) and PFAA precursors in groundwater strongly suggest that remedial activities altered the subsurface PFAS distribution, presumably through signiﬁcant pumping of groundwater and transformation of precursors to PFAAs. Additional evidence for transformation of PFAA precursors during remediation included elevated ratios of perﬂuorohexanesulfonate (PFHxS) to PFOS in groundwater near oxygen sparging wells. ■ INTRODUCTION Poly- and perﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFASs) have been very resistant to chemical and biological transformation,10−15 and some PFAAs are very diﬃcult to remove from water using produced in large quantities since the 1950s.1 Some of these conventional treatment technologies.16−18 substances, such as perﬂuorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) and Until the 1990s, waste fuels and extinguishing agents (such as perﬂuorooctanoic acid (PFOA), have been detected at elevated AFFF) were employed during ﬁreﬁghter training activities and concentrations in groundwater at ﬁreﬁghter training areas2−5 as were released into the environment without treatment. These a result of repeated application of aqueous ﬁlm forming foams releases often occurred repeatedly over many years, leading to (AFFFs) during ﬁreﬁghter training exercises. AFFFs are known large amounts of contaminants (fuels, residual chlorinated to contain multiple classes of PFASs,6 and recent studies solvents, and AFFF) inﬁltrating into the subsurface. Many of document the presence of a wide variety of presumed these training sites have undergone extensive remedial activities perﬂuoroalkyl acid (PFAA) precursors as well as PFAAs such to address fuel and/or chlorinated solvent contamination, but as perﬂuorinated sulfonates and some carboxylates, in various AFFF formulations.3,7,8 Given that the concentrations of PFOS the extent to which these remedial activities have impacted and PFOA at these sites are frequently above the Provisional PFASs remains unclear. In particular, concerns have arisen Health Advisory (PHA) levels recently issued by the U.S. about the potential biological transformation of polyﬂuoroalkyl Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for drinking water (200 ng/L and 400 ng/L for PFOS and PFOA, respectively),9 Received: February 6, 2014 concerns have arisen with respect to the scope and extent of Revised: May 15, 2014 groundwater contamination at former ﬁreﬁghter training areas. Accepted: May 27, 2014 This concern is also partially driven by the fact that PFAAs are Published: May 27, 2014 © 2014 American Chemical Society 6644 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es5006187 | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 48, 6644−6652 Environmental Science & Technology Article precursors present in AFFF, which may, in fact, lead to higher transport data. Direct analysis of recently identiﬁed PFAA levels of PFAAs.3,7,15 precursors in groundwater was also performed, and a recently Given the interest in PFAA contamination at ﬁreﬁghter developed precursor oxidation assay26 was enlisted to help training areas, understanding the common characteristics of identify the extent of potential PFAA formation in the both treated and untreated AFFF-impacted sites is a pressing subsurface. Paired groundwater and aquifer solids samples need. While PFAA groundwater plumes have been detected at enabled the determination of ﬁeld-based solid−water distribu- several sites2,19,20 an extensive examination of the spatial tion coeﬃcients (i.e., apparent Kd values) for several PFAAs. By distribution of the full suite of identiﬁed PFASs at ﬁreﬁghter creating a conceptual model of the site and determining the training areas, particularly in relation to cocontaminants and extent of PFAS contamination, this approach may provide a cocontaminant remediation, has not yet been conducted. basis for determining the potential extent of contamination and PFASs are often simultaneously released with fuel components impact of remediation eﬀorts at similar sites. and chlorinated hydrocarbons, and, as a result, PFAS subsurface plumes would be expected to share some similarities with other coreleased contaminant plumes. However, diﬀerential transport ■ MATERIALS AND METHODS Site Description. The former ﬁreﬁghter training area of PFASs (relative to each other and to fuel and solvent (Figure 1) at Ellsworth Air Force Base (South Dakota, USA) components) would also be expected due to their unique sorption properties and transformation reactivities. Though laboratory-derived sorption constants have been measured for many PFAAs, and even some PFAA precursors,21−23 it is unclear how representative the laboratory-derived values are of ﬁeld conditions. Moreover, the potential in situ formation of PFAA from precursors as a result of remedial activities (e.g., biosparging) may signiﬁcantly impact the spatial distribution of PFASs in the subsurface at contaminated sites. While groundwater PFAS contamination has been docu- mented at ﬁreﬁghter training areas, little data exist on the extent of surface soil PFAS contamination at these sites. At one AFFF- impacted site in Flesland, Norway, burn pit samples had PFOS concentrations as high as 273 μg/kg.24 Current EPA soil screening levels for PFASs are quite high (16,000 μg/kg for PFOA and 6,000 μg/kg for PFOS), as they are meant to be protective of direct human exposure9 and are not necessarily protective of the ecosystem. However, the extent to which AFFF-impacted sites have soil concentrations above the EPA screening levels remains unclear. Lastly, though the focus of regulatory interest of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is primarily on the PFAAs,25 there is a growing awareness of the potential importance of PFAA precursors, which are present in AFFF. Though perﬂuorocarboxylates constitute a small fraction of the total ﬂuorochemical load in most AFFF formulations,7,8 there is strong evidence that many PFAA precursors may be trans- formed to PFAAs upon release to the environment.7 This may be particularly true if the subsurface microbial activity has been stimulated to enhance the natural attenuation of coconta- minants. Some of the aforementioned PFAA precursors have recently been detected in groundwater at AFFF-impacted sites,3,4 but their spatial distribution, particularly in relation to Figure 1. Aerial schematic of the former ﬁre training area at Ellsworth the PFAA plumes and cocontaminant plumes, remains Air Force Base. Speciﬁcally identiﬁed are the location of the former burn pit, the extents of the historical benzene plumes,36,37 the former unknown. Given their likely ability to undergo stronger site of discharge for the pump and treat system, and the two in situ sorption due to their often zwitterionic or cationic nature, reductive treatment (IRT) walls. Oxygen infusion into groundwater these PFAA precursors are expected to be signiﬁcantly less continues at the wells denoted with yellow triangles. The southeastern mobile than their transformation products.7 groundwater ﬂow is also indicated. The objective of this study was to evaluate whether site remediation activities signiﬁcantly altered the composition and distribution of PFASs at an AFFF-impacted ﬁreﬁghter training area by conducting an in-depth site assessment of groundwater is located in a semiarid climate. From 1942 to 1990 the ﬁre and soil PFAS contamination. To address this question, training area consisted of a 36.5 m diameter unlined, bermed groundwater, aquifer solids, and surface soil samples were burn pit. Typical ﬁreﬁghter training activities included collected and analyzed for select PFASs to enable the dispersing waste (contaminated) oils, solvents, and fuels until generation and analysis of plume maps. These maps were the ground was saturated, igniting, and subsequently extin- used to compare the relative distribution of contaminants at the guishing the ﬁre using various extinguishing ﬂuids such as site as well as the predicted extent based on laboratory-derived AFFF. Precipitation and/or spent fuel was allowed to pool in 6645 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es5006187 | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 48, 6644−6652 Environmental Science & Technology Article the burn pit until it either evaporated or inﬁltrated the and speciﬁc conductivity was measured continuously in situ subsurface.27 using a YSI multimeter (YSI Inc., Yellow Springs, Ohio, USA) In 1988 and 1989, a preliminary site investigation indicated until stabilized. Water samples were collected from within the that the soil, soil vapor, and groundwater were contaminated screened interval of the wells using Tygon tubing. New Tygon with volatile organic compounds (VOCs), semivolatile organic tubing was used for each sampling location and was discarded compounds (SVOCs), pesticides, hydrocarbons, chlorinated following sample collection. Four groundwater samples were solvents, and dioxin/furans.28 In 1990, ﬁreﬁghter-training collected at each location in 250 mL HDPE bottles that had activities were suspended, and the site was listed on the been rinsed with methanol and Milli-Q water. Several National Priority List (NPL). Due to the high concentrations of groundwater samples were also collected at each location and contaminants at the site, several diﬀerent remedies were utilized appropriately preserved prior to analysis for VOCs, TOC, and including soil vapor extraction (SVE), groundwater pump and inorganic cations. All soil and groundwater samples were treat, and installation of a dual phase extraction trench using shipped on ice overnight to the analytical laboratories. One various wells (Figure 1, Figure S1). Groundwater treatment, groundwater ﬁeld blank was collected during each sampling which occurred periodically from 1996 to 2011, included oil− event using Milli-Q water supplied by Colorado School of water separation, ﬁltration, air stripping, and granulated Mines (CSM) (EB-001 and EB-002). Laboratory blanks were activated carbon adsorption,29 with reinjection or surface also analyzed with each batch of water samples and used to set water discharge at various locations adjacent to the site. In the limits of quantitation (LOQ) for each analyte: the LOQ November 2011, this treatment system was shut down. The was required to provide at least twice the signal observed in any groundwater at the site is currently being treated by bioventing laboratory blank for that batch of samples. and oxygen infusion at several wells (Figure 1). Sample Analysis. Samples were analyzed for PFASs (Table In most places, the site is underlain by clay loam and gravely S1) at the CSM and the University of California at Berkeley sandy loam soils, possessing low to moderate permeability. The (UCB). The results of a subset of the groundwater samples clay, sand, and gravel overburden ranges in thickness from 3−9 analyzed at UCB were previously reported.3 Several samples m below ground surface (bgs) and is underlain directly by were also analyzed for VOCs, TOC, and inorganic cations at Pierre Shale bedrock. During the period when samples were CB&I Federal Services, LLC. Upon arrival at the laboratory, all collected, the groundwater depth was 2−8 m bgs, and samples were stored at 4 °C in the dark. At CSM, groundwater groundwater velocities at the site were estimated to range samples were analyzed for PFASs unﬁltered using a direct- from 0.12 m/year in shale or clay to 1 m/year in the frac

system was shut down. The was required to provide at least twice the signal observed in any groundwater at the site is currently being treated by bioventing laboratory blank for that batch of samples. and oxygen infusion at several wells (Figure 1). Sample Analysis. Samples were analyzed for PFASs (Table In most places, the site is underlain by clay loam and gravely S1) at the CSM and the University of California at Berkeley sandy loam soils, possessing low to moderate permeability. The (UCB). The results of a subset of the groundwater samples clay, sand, and gravel overburden ranges in thickness from 3−9 analyzed at UCB were previously reported.3 Several samples m below ground surface (bgs) and is underlain directly by were also analyzed for VOCs, TOC, and inorganic cations at Pierre Shale bedrock. During the period when samples were CB&I Federal Services, LLC. Upon arrival at the laboratory, all collected, the groundwater depth was 2−8 m bgs, and samples were stored at 4 °C in the dark. At CSM, groundwater groundwater velocities at the site were estimated to range samples were analyzed for PFASs unﬁltered using a direct- from 0.12 m/year in shale or clay to 1 m/year in the fractured injection liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry shale. There are sparse and thin lenses of sand and gravel at the (LC-MS/MS) method modiﬁed from Sepulvado et al.22 Brieﬂy, site where ﬂow rates can reach 25 m/year, but most of the samples were prepared for analysis by removing an aliquot of g bons, and, as a result, PFAS subsurface plumes would be expected to share some similarities with other coreleased contaminant plumes. However, diﬀerential transport ■ MATERIALS AND METHODS Site Description. The former ﬁreﬁghter training area of PFASs (relative to each other and to fuel and solvent (Figure 1) at Ellsworth Air Force Base (South Dakota, USA) components) would also be expected due to their unique sorption properties and transformation reactivities. Though laboratory-derived sorption constants have been measured for many PFAAs, and even some PFAA precursors,21−23 it is unclear how representative the laboratory-derived values are of ﬁeld conditions. Moreover, the potential in situ formation of PFAA from precursors as a result of remedial activities (e.g., biosparging) may signiﬁcantly impact the spatial distribution of PFASs in the subsurface at contaminated sites. While groundwater PFAS contamination has been docu- mented at ﬁreﬁghter training areas, little data exist on the extent of surface soil PFAS contamination at these sites. At one AFFF- impacted site in Flesland, Norway, burn pit samples had PFOS concentrations as high as 273 μg/kg.24 Current EPA soil screening levels for PFASs are quite high (16,000 μg/kg for PFOA and 6,000 μg/kg for PFOS), as they are meant to be protective of direct human exposure9 and are not necessarily protective of the ecosystem. However, the extent to which AFFF-impacted sites have soil concentrations above the EPA screening levels remai 990s, waste fuels and extinguishing agents (such as perﬂuorooctanoic acid (PFOA), have been detected at elevated AFFF) were employed during ﬁreﬁghter training activities and concentrations in groundwater at ﬁreﬁghter training areas2−5 as were released into the environment without treatment. These a result of repeated application of aqueous ﬁlm forming foams releases often occurred repeatedly over many years, leading to (AFFFs) during ﬁreﬁghter training exercises. AFFFs are known large amounts of contaminants (fuels, residual chlorinated to contain multiple classes of PFASs,6 and recent studies solvents, and AFFF) inﬁltrating into the subsurface. Many of document the presence of a wide variety of presumed these training sites have undergone extensive remedial activities perﬂuoroalkyl acid (PFAA) precursors as well as PFAAs such to address fuel and/or chlorinated solvent contamination, but as perﬂuorinated sulfonates and some carboxylates, in various AFFF formulations.3,7,8 Given that the concentrations of PFOS the extent to which these remedial activities have impacted and PFOA at these sites are frequently above the Provisional PFASs remains unclear. In particular, concerns have arisen Health Advisory (PHA) levels recently issued by the U.S. about the potential biological transformation of polyﬂuoroalkyl Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for drinking water (200 ng/L and 400 ng/L for PFOS and PFOA, respectively),9 Received: February 6, 2014 concerns have arisen with respect to t s in the log Koc data for the PFAAs, though eﬀects are dependent on soil type, the type of perﬂuorocarboxylates, despite laboratory-based evidence for PFAA, and the level of the PFAA.22 ■ diﬀerential sorption of PFAAs depending on the chain- length,21,22 there was no strong evidence for diﬀerential DISCUSSION transport of PFAAs in the groundwater (Figure 3, Figure S7). Field-Based Koc Values. The ﬁeld-based log Koc values Indeed, for most of the PFAAs investigated at this site, elevated determined in this study are, to the best of our knowledge, the levels in the groundwater could be roughly approximated by the ﬁrst ﬁeld-based log Koc values determined for PFAAs. While the location of the historical (and/or current) benzene plume trends within the perﬂuorinated sulfonates (i.e., Δ log Koc of (Figure 1). For comparison, the HYDRUS-2D simulations for ∼0.9 between PFHxS and PFOS; Table 1) were consistent with PFHxA and PFOA transport based on advection and dispersion previously observed chain-length dependent trends,21,23,35,36 alone are presented in Figure S8. The ∼4 fold diﬀerence in there were some inconsistencies between the trends in the ﬁeld- their Kd values should have led, under ideal conditions, to a ∼2 derived average log Koc values for the perﬂuorocarboxylates and fold diﬀerence in their plume centers of mass after 22 years of previous observations. The lack of clear chain-length dependent transport following 25 years of continual release (Figure S8c,d). 6649 dx.doi.org/10.1021 ndicated that solid/water partitioning was not entirely consistent with predictions based on laboratory studies. Diﬀerential PFAA transport was not strongly evident in the subsurface, likely due to remediation-induced conditions. When compared to the surface soil spatial distributions, the relative concentrations of perﬂuorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) and PFAA precursors in groundwater strongly suggest that remedial activities altered the subsurface PFAS distribution, presumably through signiﬁcant pumping of groundwater and transformation of precursors to PFAAs. Additional evidence for transformation of PFAA precursors during remediation included elevated ratios of perﬂuorohexanesulfonate (PFHxS) to PFOS in groundwater near oxygen sparging wells. ■ INTRODUCTION Poly- and perﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFASs) have been very resistant to chemical and biological transformation,10−15 and some PFAAs are very diﬃcult to remove from water using produced in large quantities since the 1950s.1 Some of these conventional treatment technologies.16−18 substances, such as perﬂuorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) and Until the 1990s, waste fuels and extinguishing agents (such as perﬂuorooctanoic acid (PFOA), have been detected at elevated AFFF) were employed during ﬁreﬁghter training activities and concentrations in groundwater at ﬁreﬁghter training areas2−5 as were released into the environment without treatment. These a result of repeated application of aqueous ﬁlm forming foams releases often occurred repeatedly over ma yzed for PFASs (Table In most places, the site is underlain by clay loam and gravely S1) at the CSM and the University of California at Berkeley sandy loam soils, possessing low to moderate permeability. The (UCB). The results of a subset of the groundwater samples clay, sand, and gravel overburden ranges in thickness from 3−9 analyzed at UCB were previously reported.3 Several samples m below ground surface (bgs) and is underlain directly by were also analyzed for VOCs, TOC, and inorganic cations at Pierre Shale bedrock. During the period when samples were CB&I Federal Services, LLC. Upon arrival at the laboratory, all collected, the groundwater depth was 2−8 m bgs, and samples were stored at 4 °C in the dark. At CSM, groundwater groundwater velocities at the site were estimated to range samples were analyzed for PFASs unﬁltered using a direct- from 0.12 m/year in shale or clay to 1 m/year in the fractured injection liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry shale. There are sparse and thin lenses of sand and gravel at the (LC-MS/MS) method modiﬁed from Sepulvado et al.22 Brieﬂy, site where ﬂow rates can reach 25 m/year, but most of the samples were prepared for analysis by removing an aliquot of groundwater travels at the lower rates. the groundwater (after vigorously shaking sample bottles by Sampling. Groundwater and soil samples were collected hand) and adding it to a prepared solution of 9% isopropyl during two ﬁeld sampling campaigns in October 2011 and alcohol (IPA) in 

Force Center for Engineering and (19) Moody, C.; Hebert, G.; Strauss, S.; Field, J. Occurrence and the Environment (BAA 689) and the Strategic Environmental persistence of perfluorooctanesulfonate and other perfluorinated Research and Development Program (SERDP ER2126 and ER surfactants in groundwater at a fire-training area at Wurtsmith Air 2128) for ﬁnancial support for this project as well as the NSF Force Base, Michigan, USA. J. Environ. Monit. 2003, 5, 341−345. (20) Moody, C. A.; Field, J. A. Perfluorinated Surfactants and the CO-AMP Bridge to the Doctorate Fellowship at the Colorado Environmental Implications of Their Use in Fire-Fighting Foams. School of Mines. In addition, the authors thank Dr. Kaneen Environ. Sci. Technol. 2000, 34, 3864−3870. Christensen for help with sampling and Lisa Kudryk and Dr. (21) Higgins, C. P.; Luthy, R. G. Sorption of perfluorinated Derrick Rodriguez for help with spatial analysis. surfactants on sediments. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2006, 40, 7251−6. ■ REFERENCES (1) Prevedouros, K.; Cousins, I.; Buck, R. C.; Korzeniowski, S. (22) Sepulvado, J. G.; Blaine, A. C.; Hundal, L. S.; Higgins, C. P. Occurrence and fate of perfluorochemicals in soil following the land application of municipal biosolids. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2011, 45, Sources, fate and transport of perﬂuorocarboxylates. Environ. Sci. 8106−12. Technol. 2006, 40. (23) Guelfo, J. L.; Higgins, C. P. Subsurface transport potential of (2) Moody, C. A.; Field, J. A. Determination of perfluorocarboxylates perfluoroalkyl acids at aqueous film-forming foam (AFFF)-impacted in groundwater impacted by fire-fighting activity. Environ. Sci. Technol. sites. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2013, 47, 4164−71. 1999, 33, 2800−2806. (24) Kärrman, A.; Elgh-Dalgren, K. Environmental levels and (3) Houtz, E. F.; Higgins, C. P.; Field, J. A.; Sedlak, D. L. Persistence distribution of structural isomers of perfluoroalkyl acids after aqueous of perfluoroalkyl acid precursors in AFFF-impacted groundwater and fire-fighting foam (AFFF) contamination. Environ. Chem. 2011, 8, soil. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2013, 47, 8187−8195. 372−380. (4) Backe, W. J.; Day, T. C.; Field, J. A. Zwitterionic, cationic, and (25) U.S. EPA 2011. Revisions to the Unregulated Contaminant anionic fluorinated chemicals in aqueous film forming foam Monitoring Regulation (UCMR 3) for Public Water Systems formulations and groundwater from U.S. military bases by nonaqueous Proposed rule. Fed. Regist. 2011, 76, 11713−11737. large-volume injection. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2013, 47, 5226−5234. (26) Houtz, E. F.; Sedlak, D. L. Oxidative conversion as a means of (5) Morten, M. K.; Huber, S.; Svenson, J.; Hagenaars, A.; Pabon, M.; detecting precursors to perfluoroalkyl acids in urban runoff. Environ. Trümper, M.; Berger, U.; Dries Knapen, D. H. The structure of the fire Sci. Technol. 2012, 46, 9342−9. fighting foam surfactant Forafac®1157 and its biological and (27) U.S Army Corps of Engineers Installation Restoration Program, photolytic transformation products. Chemosphere 2012, 89, 869−887. Phase II, Stage I, Ellsworth Air Force Base; 1988. 6651 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es5006187 | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 48, 6644−6652 Environmental Science & Technology Article (28) USAF Remedial Investigation Report - Operable Unit 01; Ellsworth Air Force Base, SD, 1994. (29) USAF Record of Decision for Remedial Action at Operable Unit 1; Ellsworth Air Force Base, SD, 1996. (30) U.S. EPA Method 8260 1996. (31) U.S. EPA Method 9060 - Total Organic Carbon 2004. (32) U.S. EPA Method 5030 1996. (33) U.S. EPA Method 300.0 1993. (34) Oliver, M.; Webster, R. Kriging: a method of interpolation for geographical information systems. Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Syst. 1990, 4. (35) Goss, K.; Bronner, G.; Harner, T.; Hertel, M.; Schmidt, T. The partition behavior of fluorotelomer alcohols and olefins. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2006, 40, 3572−3577. (36) Guelfo, J. L.; Wunsch, A.; McCray, J. E.; Higgins, C. P. Transport potential of perﬂuoroalkyl acids (PFAAs) at AFFF-impacted sites: column experiments and modeling. Manuscript in preparation. (37) Newsted, J. L.; Coady, K. K.; Beach, S. A.; Butenhoff, J. L.; Gallagher, S.; Giesy, J. P. Effects of perfluorooctane sulfonate on mallard and northern bobwhite quail exposed chronically via the diet. Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2007, 23, 1−9. (38) Oakes, K.; Benskin, J. P.; Martin, J.; Ings, J.; Heinrichs, J.; Dixon, D.; Servos, M. Biomonitoring of perfluorochemicals and toxicity to the downstream fish community of Etobicoke Creek following deploy- ment of aqueous film-forming foam. Aquat. Toxicol. 2010, 98, 120− 129. (39) Custer, C. M.; Custer, T. W.; Dummer, P. M.; Etterson, M. A.; Thogmartin, W. E.; Wu, Q.; Kannan, K.; Trowbridge, A.; McKann, P. C. Exposure and effects of perfluoroalkyl substances in tree swallows nesting in Minnesota and Wisconsin, USA. Arch. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 2014, 66, 120−138. 6652 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es5006187 | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 48, 6644−6652