ARTICLE pubs.acs.org/est Fate of Perfluorinated Carboxylates and Sulfonates During Snowmelt Within an Urban Watershed Torsten Meyer,*,† Amila O. De Silva,‡ Christine Spencer,‡ and Frank Wania† † Department of Physical and Enironmental Sciences, University of Toronto Scarborough, 1265 Military Trail, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M1C 1A4 ‡ Water Science and Technology Directorate, Environment Canada, 867 Lakeshore Road, P.O. Box 5050 Burlington, Ontario, Canada L7R 4A6 bS Supporting Information See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles. ABSTRACT: The transport dynamics of perﬂuorinated carboxylic acids and sulfonates during snowmelt in the highly urbanized Highland Creek watershed in Toronto, Canada was investigated by analyzing river water, bulk Downloaded via FUDAN UNIV on March 13, 2026 at 06:29:05 (UTC). snow, and groundwater, sampled in February and March 2010, by means of liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Perﬂuorohexanoate, per- ﬂuorooctanoate, and perﬂuorooctane sulfonate were dominant in river water, with concentrations of 4.014 ng 3 L1, 2.27.9 ng 3 L1, and 2.16.5 ng 3 L1, respectively. Relatively high levels of perﬂuorohexanoate may be related to the recent partial replacement in various consumer products of perﬂuorooctyl substances with shorter-chained perﬂuorinated compounds (PFCs). Highest PFC concentrations were found within the more urbanized part of the drainage area, suggestive of residential, industrial, and/or traﬃc-related sources. The riverine ﬂux of PFCs increased during the snowmelt period, but only approximately one-ﬁfth of the increased ﬂux can be attributed to PFCs present in the snowpack, mostly because concentration in snow are generally quite low compared to those in river water. The remainder of the increased ﬂux must be due to the mobilization of PFCs by the high ﬂow conditions prevalent during snowmelt. Run-oﬀ behavior was clearly dependent on perﬂuoroalkyl chain length: Dilution with relatively clean snowmelt water caused a drop in the river water concentrations of short-chain PFCs at high ﬂow during early melting. This prevented an early concentration peak of those water-soluble PFCs within the stream, as could have been expected in response to their early release from a melting snowpack. Instead, concentrations of particle-associated long-chain PFCs in creek water peaked early in the melt, presumably because high ﬂow mobilized contaminated particles from impervious surfaces in the more urbanized areas of the watershed. The ability to enter the subsurface and deeper groundwater aquifers increased with the PFCs0 water solubility, that is, was inversely related to perﬂuoroalkyl chain length. ’ INTRODUCTION Whereas we are not aware of any study having investigated the Perﬂuorinated carboxylic acids (PFCAs) and sulfonates fate of PFCs in urban watersheds during snowmelt, there are (PFSAs) are persistent, anthropogenic contaminants with ubi- reports of concentrations of PFCs during rain events within quitous environmental distribution.1 Important point sources of urban streams,9,10 lakes,7 and street runoﬀ,11 as well as PFCs in PFCs are wastewater treatment plants,2 ﬂuorochemical manu- urban snow.12,13 Most of those studies related the presence of facturing facilities, places of ﬁre ﬁghting foam usage, and PFCs largely to urban activities, and to a lesser extent to atmo- landﬁlls.3 Notable nonpoint sources are urban areas,4 as well as spheric sources. Murakami and Takada4 found a correlation atmospheric deposition following oxidation of volatile pre- between PFCs in major rivers in Japan and population density. cursors.5 Nonionic precursors such as perﬂuoroalkyl sulfona- Besides point sources, urban watersheds comprise signiﬁcant mides, perﬂuoroalkyl sulfonamido ethanols, and ﬂuorotelomer nonpoint sources of PFCs to surface waters.7,9,10 The amount of alcohols are relatively volatile and can undergo atmospheric PFCs released from urban nonpoint sources to Japanese streams transport prior to transformation and deposition.5 In urban was estimated to be similar to the amount released from regions however, atmospheric transformation of precursors to PFCs is limited due to the presence of relatively high NOx Special Issue: Perﬂuoroalkyl Acid levels.6,7 Signiﬁcant sinks and reservoirs of PFCs are sediments and deep ocean waters.3,8 Whereas shorter-chained PFCs are Received: January 11, 2011 relatively water-soluble, those with longer chains can sorb Accepted: June 2, 2011 strongly to particles and are subject to sedimentation and Revised: May 26, 2011 resuspension processes.8 Published: June 21, 2011 r 2011 American Chemical Society 8113 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es200106q | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2011, 45, 8113–8119 Environmental Science & Technology ARTICLE wastewater treatment plants.14 Notably higher concentrations of PFCs in urban streams during daytime were attributed to enhanced human outdoor activity.10 Other potential sources are parking lots,7 ﬁne street particles originating from heavily used streets,4 commercial and transport related land use,14 as well as indoor air from residential and commercial buildings.15 During peak runoﬀ the PFC ﬂuxes in the streams notably increase,9,10 indicative of their fast removal from watershed surfaces. In urban surface water short- to medium-chained PFCs such as perﬂuor- ooctanoate (PFOA),7,16 perﬂuorooctane sulfonate (PFOS),9,16 and perﬂuorononanoate (PFNA)10 are dominant. Similarly, relatively high concentrations in urban snow (Dalian and She- nyang, China) have been reported for PFOS and PFOA;12,13 however, also for PFHpA.13 The fate of organic chemicals in urban watersheds is highly complex, especially when snow and snowmelt processes are involved.17 Many organic chemicals can be eﬃciently scavenged from the atmosphere by snow and may be released during melting, many weeks after deposition, in the form of short and Figure 1. Highland Creek watershed with sampling locations and the gauging stations GS-E (East) and GS-W (West) (green color on the map concentrated pulses (e.g., refs 18 and 19). Diﬀerences between designates green space). Sites A to E, river water samples; site GW, stormwater runoﬀ and snowmelt water ablation include the groundwater samples. timing of chemical transport and the ampliﬁcation of concentra- tions. In urbanized areas snow melts earlier and meltwater arrives faster at the streams than in green spaces.20 Also, organic densely populated areas, and land use related to industry, and chemicals, including PFCs, are released from melting snow packs utilities/transportation. at diﬀerent times: the water-soluble fraction often elutes early Sampling. River water, bulk snow and groundwater were during the melt period, whereas the particulate fraction is sampled during one snowmelt period in February/March 2010, released at the end of melting.21,22 During runoﬀ in urban areas lasting nearly two weeks. At the end of this period most of the chemicals are rapidly removed from impervious surfaces along snow around the watershed had melted. Additional river water channels and canalized stream beds. When runoﬀ occurs on samples, representing normal flow conditions, were taken once natural ground, contaminants can be transported with overland after the melt period (Figure 2). The period of snowpack or subsurface ﬂow, whereby the former delivers contaminants to accumulation prior to the melt was relatively short and not the streams relatively fast and undiluted. interrupted by melt-freeze cycles (Figure 2 and Supporting This study aimed at identifying the environmental pathways of Information (SI) Figure S1). River water was sampled 13 times PFCs during snowmelt runoﬀ within a highly urbanized wa- at site A, and 4 times at four additional sites (sites BE) tershed by integrating data of chemical concentrations in bulk (Figures 1 and 2). Samples were collected in one-liter high snow, river water and groundwater with hydrological data such as density polyethylene (HDPE) bottles according to the proce- river ﬂow rates and precipitation. We previously investigated the dure described in USGS.24 Simultaneously collected, smaller transport dynamics of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and samples were analyzed for specific conductivity (SI Figures pesticides during snowmelt in the same watershed.17 The two S2S4). Bulk snow samples were collected in four-liter HDPE studies complement each other by providing insight into the fate bottles on three different days at site A and once at sites B and C of a variety of organic contaminants under diﬀerent snowmelt by using a solvent-rinsed stainless steel shovel to excavate conditions. quader-formed bulk snow blocks comprising the entire snowpack depth. Groundwater samples (GW) were collected twice in the ’ MATERIALS AND METHODS middle of the melt period, and once at the end of melt (Figure 2) at the Scarborough Bluﬀs, a cliﬀed shoreline of Lake Site Description. Highland Creek flows through the eastern Ontario located southeast of the watershed, where groundwater part of the city of Toronto and discharges into Lake Ontario. Its from two horizontal aquifers seeps out of the cliﬀ slope (Figure 1 watershed (102 km2) is highly urbanized (ca. 85% is used and SI Figure S5).25 Three and two samples were taken from the residentially, industrially/commercially, and for roads 23), with lower and upper aquifer, respectively, by digging trenches into the remainder being green space (Figure 1). The only wastewater the cliﬀ slope. GW ﬂow in the Highland Creek watershed is treatment plant within the watershed (Highland Creek WWTP) mainly from North to South.26 The depth of the water table near has its outfall submerged within Lake Ontario. None of the the Bluﬀs is usually 12 m. At the sampling site the aquitard sampling sites receives water that is influenced by known point separating both aquifers ranges between approximately 4 and 10 sources of PFCs. The area southeast of the former shoreline of m depth, whereas the lower aquifer reaches down to 30 m.25 The ancient Lake Iroquois consists largely of a sand plain which sampling trenches at the cliﬀ slope were located near the bottom allows for extensive exchange between surface and sub- of each of the aquifers. Products containing ﬂuorinated polymers surface water,23 suggesting the potential of transfer of water- were avoided during sampling. All samples were stored at 4 °C soluble pollutants to groundwater aquifers. The western part of until extraction. the watershed is upstream of the eastern part. The former is more Meteorological records on an hourly basis provided by the heavily urbanized than the latter, that is, it comprises more weather station of the University of Toronto Scarborough (near 8114 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es200106q |Environ. Sci. Technol. 2011, 45, 8113–8119 Environmental Science & Technology ARTICLE ammonia in methanol under gravity and by using a vacuum pump at the very end. Whereas the first fraction elutes PFOSA, the second fraction elutes all other compounds. The extracts were concentrated to aliquots of 0.25 mL using N2. Perﬂuorohexanoate (PFHxA), perﬂuoroheptanoate (PFH- pA), PFOA, PFNA, perﬂuorodecanoate (PFDA), perﬂuoroun- decanoate (PFUnA), perﬂuorododecanoate (PFDoA), perﬂuor- otridecanoate (PFTrA), perﬂuorotetradecanoate (PFTeA), perﬂuorobutanesulfonate (PFBS), perﬂuorohexanesulfonate (PFHxS), PFOS, and perﬂuorooctanesulfonamide (PFOSA) (SI Table S1) were quantiﬁed in the extracts using an Agilent 1100 liquid chromatograph (Agilent Technology, PaloAlto, CA), coupled to an API 4000 triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) operated in electro-spray ionization mode (ESI, negative polarity) with multiple reaction monitoring (MRM). Method detection limits (MDLs) are listed in SI Table S2. Quality assurance involved the extraction of two method blanks with every set of samples, and two ﬁeld blanks. Field blanks were subjected to the same extraction and cleanup procedures as the samples. All reported data were blank cor- rected using the averages of all method blanks and 2 ﬁeld blanks, provided they exceeded the MDLs. A detailed QA/QC descrip- tion is provided within the Supporting Information. ’ RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Concentrations and Composition in Streamwater. Con- centrations in environmental samples are reported in SI Tables S3S6. The dominant substance in streamwater was PFHxA, followed by PFOA and PFOS (SI Figure S6). The concentration ranges of the PFCs in river water were as follows: 4.014 ng 3 L1 for PFHxA, 1.24.5 ng 3 L1 for PFHpA, 2.27.9 ng 3 L1 for PFOA, 0.802.5 ng 3 L1 for PFNA, 0.331.6 ng 3 L1 for PFDA, 0.0700.44 ng 3 L1 for PFUnA, 0.0260.48 ng 3 L1 for PFDoA, not detected0.086 ng 3 L1 for PFTrA, not detected0.13 ng 3 L1 for PFTeA, 0.283.8 ng 3 L1 for PFBS, 0.241.7 ng 3 L1 for PFHxS, 2.16.5 ng 3 L1 for PFOS, and 0.00450.32 ng 3 L1 for PFOSA (Figures 3 and 4). Whereas the predominance of both PFOA and PFOS is similar to that in other urban streams,9,10 the high abundance of PFHxA is unusual. Its concentrations are elevated to a similar extent in eastern and western Highland Creek and in a similar pattern as other short- Figure 2. River ﬂow rates (m3 3 s1) at the two gauging stations GS-E chained PFCs (Figures 3 and 4) and its prevalence can therefore and GS-W, temperature (°C), and precipitation events (pictograms) not be explained by unknown point sources or biotransformation during the melt period in 2010. The sample numbers in the upper two of compounds that are released in association with fire-fighting subplots are assigned according to the sampling sites’ nearest gauging foam usage. Recent partial replacement of C8PFCs by shorter- station (Figure 1). UA, upper aquifer; LA, lower aquifer; S, bulk snow chained PFCs for a variety of consumer products may be res- samples. Samples taken on March 18 represent normal low ﬂow ponsible for its high abundance.30 Relatively high concentrations conditions. of PFCs were found at sampling sites C and D, pointing to a relationship with urban land use. Whereas sites A and B receive site A), stream discharge records on a quarter-hourly basis from meltwater from the green space in the eastern part of the two gauging stations operated by Environment Canada27 watershed, runoff from the highly urbanized area in the western (Figures 1 and 2), and snowpack depth records from a weather part affects sites C and D, where we previously also found higher station located 2 km West of the watershed (SI Figure S1) were concentrations of PAHs.17 used to identify the driving forces of the observed phenomena. Concentrations in Bulk Snow. The concentrations of the Analysis. The chemical analytical methods are described in PFCs in bulk snow (Figure 5) were lower than in the meltwater detail elsewhere.28,29 Briefly, duplicate samples of 250 mL each receiving streams (Figures 3 and 4). In particular, concentrations were spiked with isotopically labeled recovery standards and of the short-chained PFCs (PFHxA, PFHpA, PFOA, PFBS, extracted using Oasis WAX solid phase extraction (SPE) car- PFHxS) were lower by 1 order of magnitude. Consistent with tridge (6 cm3, 150 mg, 30 μm) from Waters (Milford, MA). The the higher river water concentrations in the more urbanized first fraction was eluted with 6 mL methanol under gravity only, western Highland Creek, PFC levels in bulk snow from site C whereas the second fraction was eluted with 8 mL of 0.1% were higher than at sites A and B. Repeated sampling at site A 8115 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es200106q |Environ. Sci. Technol. 2011, 45, 8113–8119 Environmental Science & Technology ARTICLE Figure 3. River water concentrations at sampling site A vs river ﬂow rates and sample order. Lower right subplot: PFOS and PFBS  left vertical axis, PFHxS and PFOSA—right vertical axis. Numbers on x-axes correspond to the samples A1 to A13 (Figure 2). (samples S1S3) indicated an increase of the PFC bulk snow runoﬀ. Those calculations were done for ﬁve instances during concentrations over the course of the melt period (Figure 5). The high ﬂow conditions (A3, A5, A6, C1, C2, Figures 1 and 2). On concentration increase between the first two sampling days may average only one-ﬁfth of all PFCs originates from the snowpack have been caused by deposition with snow and rain (Figures 2 (SI Figure S7). Whereas snow is estimated to contribute less than and 5), whereby the C6C10 PFCAs and all quantified PFSAs 10% of the short-chained PFCs (PFHxA, PFHpA, PFBS) in the increased the most. Another increase in bulk snow concentra- streamwater, its contribution for longer-chained PFCs such as tions occurred between the second and third sampling, with the PFUnA, PFTrA, and PFOS exceeds 30% (SI Figure S7).The C12C13 PFCAs showing the strongest increase. Melt water loss remainder must have been due to remobilisation of PFCs and accumulation of particle bound PFCs on top of the snow- induced by the high ﬂow conditions. pack surface, as well as snow sublimation31 may have caused this Phase Partitioning in the Streams. The particulate and concentration increase. Surprisingly, concentrations of the short- dissolved fractions of the samples were not analyzed separately. er-chained PFCs also increased, even though their relatively high Instead, correlations between substances were used to categorize water solubility should have led to an early release from the snow their runoff behavior and to draw conclusions regarding phase packs.22 However, spatial variability of melting in the Highland partitioning. The concentrations of the shorter-chained C6C9 Creek watershed is high. The bulk snow sampling location at site PFCAs and the PFSAs at site A are strongly and significantly A, exhibiting low solar exposure, high albedo, and large heat correlated with each other (except for PFBS, mainly because of discharge capacity, experienced relatively little meltwater loss. one outlier). Similarly correlated with each other are the con- Snow sublimation presumably outweighed the chemical loss that centrations of the longer-chained C10C13 PFCAs. PFTeA occurred during melting. (C14) was not considered due to a limited number of samples In order to quantify the contribution of snowmelt water to the above the MDL. At the same time, correlations between short- PFC burden in Highland Creek, we compared the chemical and long-chained PFCAs, as well as between the PFSAs and long- amount in bulk snow and in river water during melting. First, the chained PFCAs are weak or nonexistent, except for the correla- overall chemical input ﬂux into the streams during the melt was tion between PFNA and PFDA (C9 and C10) (r = 0.62, p < 0.05). calculated as the diﬀerence between the chemical ﬂux in the river The latter two chemicals obviously constitute a transition in during high and base ﬂow conditions. Those ﬂuxes were calcu- runoff behavior between the C6C8 PFCAs and the PFSAs on lated by multiplying the river water concentration measured at the one hand, and the C11C13 PFCAs on the other hand. The sampling sites A and C with the river ﬂow rate recorded at the divergent behavior of the two groups cannot be explained with a time of sampling at the nearby gauging stations (Figure 1). different usage of the chemicals in different areas of the Second, the maximum chemical ﬂux from the melting snow cover watershed. The concentrations of both groups are enhanced to into the river was estimated by multiplying the measured bulk a similar extent at the western sites C and D (Figures 35). This snow concentrations with the river ﬂow that is due to meltwater transition is therefore assumed to mark the difference between 8116 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es200106q |Environ. Sci. Technol. 2011, 45, 8113–8119 Environmental Science & Technology ARTICLE concentrations of the shorter-chained substances increase during the melt period, those of the longer-chained PFCs rather show a decreasing trend. Higgins and Luthy8 list log KOC values that describe the equilibrium partitioning of PFCs between organic sediment and water. Accordingly, the C6C9 PFCAs and the PFSAs on the one hand and the C10C13 PFCAs on the other hand are separated by a threshold log KOC value between 2.57 and 2.76. Neutral organic chemicals exhibiting similar log KOC values are assumed to be almost completely dissolved within the aqueous phase of the streamwater.17 Therefore, in the case of PFCs additional sorption mechanisms besides that of sorption to organic matter may be effective. Zushi and Masunaga10 may have identiﬁed a similar threshold for PFC partitioning. Diﬀerences in the runoﬀ behavior of PFNA and PFUnA (C9 and C11) were assumed to reﬂect the chemicals0 diﬀerent partitioning between suspended particles and the dis- solved phase in the streamwater. In Plassmann et al.22 the phase transition between meltwater and snow grains within a melting snowpack, was represented by the C8C10 PFCAs and the C6C8 PFSAs. PFCAs and PFSAs with less than 9 and 7 alkyl- carbons, respectively, were mostly dissolved in meltwater, whereas longer-chained PFCs were strongly sorbed to the snow. Besides chain length, the partitioning of PFCs between aqueous phase and sorbed phase may also be inﬂuenced by certain ions.8 Thus, at the onset of melting when ion concentration in High- land Creek water exhibits very high values (SI Figures S2, S3),17 an additional fraction of PFCs with intermediate partitioning properties may transfer to the particulate phase, and subse- Figure 4. River water concentrations at all sampling sites vs river ﬂow quently settle in areas of calmed ﬂow such as near the river rates at site A and sample order. In order to compare site A with the other mouth. sites, the columns of site A are represented by the following samples: ﬁrst Runoff Dynamics of the PFCs. One motivation for imple- column, average of samples A2, A3; second column, average of A4, A5; third column, A9; fourth column, A13 (Figure 2). Column 4 of all sites menting this study was to find out whether concentration peak represents concentrations during normal ﬂow conditions. releases of water-soluble organic chemicals from a melting snowpack21 are reflected in enhanced streamwater concentra- tions at the beginning of the melt period. The first three samples of the high resolution concentration sequences in Figure 3 suggests a minor first flush of the relatively water-soluble C6C10 PFCAs and the PFSAs. The relative small fraction of PFCs originating from the snowpack presumably prevented a more pronounced early enrichment of those substances. Also, in comparison to glacial runoff where the meltwater has very limited contact with soil and vegetation,19 runoff in urban, temperate areas is often characterized by dilution and buffering of the meltwater during subsurface flow, as well as a more heteroge- neous runoff pattern around the watershed. Water-soluble inorganic ions, however, were highly enriched in the streams at an early stage of melting (SI Figures S2 and S3). Most of them were constituents of deicing salt and were directly and rapidly flushed almost exclusively from the streets and highway into the streams. Figure 5. Concentrations in bulk snow samples. Lower right subplot: The chemical ﬂux of all PFCs substantially increased during PFOS, left vertical axis; PFHxS and PFOSA, right vertical axis. Samples the early stage of melting, not least because river water ﬂow S1S3 were taken at site A, S4 at site B, and S5 at site C. increased approximately 10-fold (Figure 2 and SI Figures S8 and S9). The transfer of PFCs from watershed surfaces and sub- chemicals that are mainly sorbed to suspended particulate matter surfaces to the river is controlled by the intensity of melting, (C10C13 PFCAs), and substances that are predominantly which is apparent in a strong and highly signiﬁcant correlation present in the dissolved phase of the river water (C6C9 PFCAs, between river ﬂow rate and chemical ﬂux at site A (SI Table S7). PFSAs). The correlation between the two chemicals with inter- Meyer et al.17 found a similar correlation for PAHs. Whereas the mediate partition properties, PFNA and PFDA, suggests that chemical ﬂux of the C11C14 PFCAs increased by 1 to 2 orders they were present in both the particulate and dissolved phases in of magnitude, the increase is less than 1 order of magnitude for notable parts. This transition is also reflected in the pattern of the the shorter-chained C6C10 PFCAs and the PFSAs (SI Figures PFC concentration sequences (Figures 3 and 4). Whereas the S8 and S9). The former are primarily particle-bound and are 8117 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es200106q |Environ. Sci. Technol. 2011, 45, 8113–8119 Environmental Science & Technology ARTICLE more eﬀectively remobilised by high ﬂow. The increase in ﬂux of the shorter-chained PFCs observed here is similar to that observed during rain runoﬀ in streams of Yokohama city, Japan.9,10 The ﬂux increase of the only longer-chained substance (PFUnA) measured by Zushi and Masunaga10 however, is notably smaller than that in our study. The gauging station GS-W receives meltwater from the more urbanized western part of the watershed, whereas GS-E is additionally inﬂuenced by runoﬀ from the eastern green space (Figure 1).17 The ratio between the peak river ﬂow rates at GS-E and GS-W provides information about the relative extent of runoﬀ in both parts of the watershed. This ratio was highest on February 27 when the runoﬀ had its peak (SI Figure S10). Melting on that day was mainly induced by a rain event, leading to a relatively uniform runoﬀ pattern around the watershed. On the next day, when melting was induced by irradiation only, GS- W recorded relatively higher ﬂow rates (the ﬂow rate ratio GS-E/ GS-W decreased by 13%, reﬂecting preferred runoﬀ in the urbanized west. At the same time, the concentrations of the long-chained and primarily particle bound PFCs were reaching a peak (Figures 3 and 4). Meyer et al.17 observed a similar correla- tion between comparably high ﬂow rates at GS-W and elevated PAH levels in Highland Creek streamwater. Accordingly, at an early stage of the melt period, when melting is not induced by rain, the river receives highly polluted runoﬀ primarily from the more urbanized part of the watershed. The peak ﬂow rate ratio increased during subsequent days indicative of the delayed arrival of meltwater from the green space. Linear correlations between river ﬂow rates and chemical ﬂuxes (SI Table S7) and the quarter-hourly ﬂow rate records provided by the gauging station GS-E were used to estimate the Figure 6. Concentrations in groundwater samples taken at the Scarbor- total amount of each PFC that passes through sampling site A ough Bluﬀs. Middle subplot: PFNA  left vertical axis, PFDA and PFUnA, right vertical axis. UA-1 and UA-2 taken from the upper aquifer, over the entire melt period (SI Table S8). The ratio between LA-1 to LA-3 taken from the lower aquifer. chemical ﬂux and the river ﬂow rate refers to the ﬂow-weighted mean concentration (FWMC). The latter is commonly used to snowmelt period and may originate largely from further inland estimate average concentrations of various constituents in rivers. because the aquitard separating both aquifers near the cliff slope The total amount passing site A ranges between 0.035 g for is sparsely permeable. PFC concentration ratios between the PFTrA and 13 g for PFHxA. The chemical ﬂuxes at site E located streamwater and each of the aquifers were calculated to investi- at the river mouth are expected to be similar to those at site A, gate the relative extent of transfer of individual PFCs to ground- indicated by similar chemical concentrations at both sites water (SI Figure S11). Although the PFCs in the sampled (Figures 1, 3, and 4). Thus, the chemical amounts listed in SI groundwater were likely not transferred from the streams, the Table S8 should approximate those that had entered Lake Highland Creek water concentrations may represent typical PFC Ontario during the investigated snowmelt period. The calculated runoff levels within the watershed. As expected the concentration amounts of PFOA and PFOS are negligible compared to the ratio surface water/lower aquifer is notably higher than that overall input into Lake Ontario which is dominated by inﬂow between surface water and upper aquifer, reflecting a more from wastewater treatment plants and Lake Erie.32 limited chemical transfer to deeper aquifers. Also, both ratios PFCs in Groundwater. The concentrations of PFCs in increase with increasing perfluoroalkyl chain length, reflecting groundwater from the Highland Creek watershed (Figure 6) the enhanced ability of the more water-soluble PFCs to percolate are well in the range of those found in Tokyo, Japan.33 Transport through soils. to groundwater is not limited to water-soluble PFCs, as even Murakami et al.33 also observed a stronger retention of longer- relatively hydrophobic substances such as PFDA and PFUnA are chained PFCs within soils. The more hydrophobic PFUnA is the readily detected in the lower aquifer (Figure 6). The sand plain only substance that was equally distributed in both aquifers prevalent southeast of the former shoreline of Lake Iroquois (Figure 6). This chemical’s presence in the upper aquifer seems allows for rapid transfer of meltwater and the chemicals therein less inﬂuenced by the snowmelt, and likely represents long-term from the surface to the upper aquifer (Figure 1).23 At the onset of background concentrations. melting the discharge at the Scarborough Bluff slope may respond within 24 h to the enhanced pressure in the aquifer, imposed by the melt at the surface behind the bluffs.25 Therefore, ’ ASSOCIATED CONTENT the PFCs in the samples taken from the upper aquifer several days after the onset of melting likely originated to a large extent at bS Supporting Information. Additional information, in- the bluff’s table surface and subsurface. The samples taken from cluding quality assurance/quality control, speciﬁc conductivities, the lower aquifer however, were likely not influenced by this tabulated chemical concentrations, and chemical ﬂux ﬁgures. 8118 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es200106q |Environ. Sci. Technol. 2011, 45, 8113–8119 Environmental Science & Technology ARTICLE This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http:// contamination and assessment of carpet as a possible source. Environ. Sci. pubs.acs.org. Technol. 2009, 43, 7317–7323. (16) D’eon, J. C.; Crozier, P. W.; Furdui, V. I.; Reiner, E. J.; Libelo, ’ AUTHOR INFORMATION E. L.; Mabury, S. A. Perﬂuorinated phosphonic acids in Canadian surface waters and wastewater treatment plant eﬄuent: Discovery of a new class Corresponding Author of perﬂuorinated acids. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 2009, 28, 2101–2107. *E-mail: torsten.meyer@utoronto.ca. (17) Meyer, T.; Lei, Y. D.; Wania, F. Transport of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and pesticides during snowmelt within an urban watershed. Water Res. 2011, 45, 1147–1156. (18) Simmleit, N.; Herrmann, R.; Thomas, W. Chemical behaviour ’ ACKNOWLEDGMENT of hydrophobic micropollutants during the melting of snow. IAHS Publ. We are indebted to Nick Eyles for his guidance in ﬁnding the 1986, 155, 335–346. groundwater sampling site, and Mandy Meriano (both from the (19) Lafreniere, M. J.; Blais, J. M.; Sharp, M. J.; Schindler, D. W. Organochlorine pesticide and polychlorinated biphenyl concentrations University of Toronto Scarborough) for providing insight into in snow, snowmelt, and runoﬀ at Bow Lake, Alberta. Environ. Sci. the groundwater conditions in the Highland Creek watershed. Technol. 2006, 40, 4909–4915. NSERC is acknowledged for funding. (20) Bengtsson, L.; Westerstr€om, G. Urban snowmelt and runoﬀ in northern Sweden. Hydro. Sci. 1992, 37, 263–275. (21) Meyer, T.; Wania, F. Organic contaminant ampliﬁcation during ’ REFERENCES snowmelt—A review. Water Res. 2008, 42, 1847–1865. (1) Lau, C.; Anitole, K.; Hodes, C.; Lai, D.; Pfahles-Hutchens, A.; (22) Plassmann, M. M.; Meyer, T.; Lei, Y. D.; Wania, F.; McLachlan, Seed, J. Perﬂuoroalkyl acids: A review of monitoring and toxicological M. S.; Berger, U. Laboratory studies on the fate of perﬂuoroalkyl ﬁndings. Toxicol. Sci. 2007, 99, 366–394. carboxylates and sulfonates during snow melt. Submitted. (2) Schultz, M. M.; Higgins, C. P.; Huset, C. A.; Luthy, R. G.; (23) TRCA—Toronto and Region Conservation Authority. State of Barofsky, D. F.; Field, J. A. Fluorochemical mass ﬂows in a muni- the Watershed Report: Highland Creek Watershed; City of Toronto and cipal wastewater treatment facility. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2006, 40, the TRCA: Downsview, Ontario, Canada, 1999. 7350–7357. (24) USGS—United States Geological Survey. National Field Man- (3) Prevedouros, K.; Cousins, I. T.; Buck, R. C.; Korzeniowski, S. H. ual for the Collection of Water-Quality Data, (TWRI—Book 9). Chapter Sources, fate and transport of perﬂuorocarboxylates. Environ. Sci. A4—Collection of Water Samples (Version 2.0, 9, 2006). http://pubs. Technol. 2006, 40, 32–44. water.usgs.gov/twri9A (accessed Jan. 8, 2010). (4) Murakami, M.; Takada, H. Perﬂuorinated surfactants (PFSs) in (25) Eyles, N.; Howard, K. W. F. A hydrochemical study of urban size-fractionated street dust in Tokyo. Chemosphere 2008, 73, 1172– landslides caused by heavy rain: Scarborough Bluﬀs, Ontario, Canada. 1177. Can. Geotech. J. 1988, 25, 455–466. (5) Shoeib, M.; Vlahos, P.; Harner, T.; Peters, A.; Graustein, M.; (26) Meriano, M.; Eyles, N. Groundwater ﬂow through Pleistocene Narayan, J. Survey of polyﬂuorinated chemicals (PFCs) in the atmo- glacial deposits in the rapidly urbanizing Rouge River—Highland Creek sphere over the northeast Atlantic Ocean. Atmos. Environ. 2010, watershed, City of Scarborough, Southern Ontario, Canada. Hydrogeol. J. 44, 2887–2893. 2003, 11, 288–303. (6) Ellis, D. A.; Martin, J. W.; De Silva, A. O.; Mabury, S. A.; Hurley, (27) Environment Canada—Water Oﬃce. Real-time hydrometric M. D.; Andersen, M. P. S.; Wallington, T. J. Degradation of ﬂuorotelo- data. www.wateroﬃce.ec.gc.ca (accessed September 16, 2010). mer alcohols: A likely atmospheric source of perﬂuorinated carboxylic (28) Scott, B. F.; Spencer, C.; Lopez, E.; Muir, D. C. G. Perﬂuor- acids. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2004, 38, 3316–3321. oalkyl acid concentrations in Canadian rivers and creeks. Water Qual. (7) Kim, S.-K.; Kannan, K. Perﬂuorinated acids in air, rain, snow, Res. J. Can. 2009, 44, 263–277. surface runoﬀ, and lakes: relative importance of pathways to contamina- (29) Scott, B. F.; De Silva, A. O.; Spencer, C.; Lopez, E.; Backus, tion of urban lakes. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2007, 41, 8328–8334. S. M.; Muir, D. C. G. Perﬂuoroalkyl acids in Lake Superior water: trends (8) Higgins, C. P.; Luthy, R. G. Sorption of perﬂuorinated surfac- and sources. J. Great Lakes Res. 2010, 36, 277–284. tants on sediments. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2006, 40, 7251–7256. (30) Ritter, S. K. Fluorochemicals go short. Chem. Eng. News 2010, (9) Zushi, Y.; Takeda, T.; Masunaga, S. Existence of nonpoint source 88, 12–17. of perﬂuorinated compounds and their loads in the Tsurumi River basin, (31) Marsh, P. Snowcover formation and melt: recent advances and Japan. Chemosphere 2008, 71, 1566–1573. future prospects. Hydrol. Proc. 1999, 13, 2117–2134. (10) Zushi, Y.; Masunaga, S. First-ﬂush loads of perﬂuorinated (32) Boulanger, B.; Peck, A. M.; Schnoor, J. L.; Hornbuckle, K. C. compounds in stormwater runoﬀ from Hayabuchi River basin, Japan Mass budget of perﬂuorooctane surfactants in Lake Ontario. Environ. Sci. served by separated sewerage system. Chemosphere 2009a, 76, 833–840. Technol. 2005, 39, 74–79. (11) Murakami, M.; Shinohara, H.; Takada, H. Evaluation of waste- (33) Murakami, M.; Kuroda, K.; Sato, N.; Fukushi, T.; Takizawa, S.; water and street runoﬀ as sources of perﬂuorinated surfactants (PFSs). Takada, H. Groundwater pollution by perﬂuorinated surfactants in Chemosphere 2009a, 74, 487–493. Tokyo. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2009b, 43, 3480–3486. (12) Liu, W.; Jin, Y.-H.; Quan, X.; Sasaki, K.; Saito, N.; Nakayama, S. F.; Sato, I.; Tsuda, S. Perﬂuorosulfonates and perﬂuorocarboxylates in snow and rain in Dalian, China. Environ. Int. 2009a, 35, 737–742. (13) Liu, W.; Dong, G.-H.; Jin, Y.-H.; Sasaki, K.; Saito, N.; Sato, I.; Tsuda, S.; Nakayama, S. F. Occurrence of perﬂuoroalkyl acids in precipitation from Shenyang, China. Chin. Sci. Bull. 2009b, 54, 2440– 2445. (14) Zushi, Y.; Masunaga, S. Identifying the nonpoint source of perﬂuorinated compounds: a geographic information system based approach. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 2009b, 28, 691–700. (15) Gewurtz, S. B.; Bhavsar, S. P.; Crozier, P. W.; Diamond, M. L.; Helm, P. A.; Marvin, C. H.; Reiner, E. J. Perﬂuoroalkyl contaminants in window ﬁlm: indoor/outdoor, urban/rural, and winter/summer 8119 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es200106q |Environ. Sci. Technol. 2011, 45, 8113–8119