HHS Public Access Author manuscript Environ Sci Technol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 30. Author Manuscript Published in final edited form as: Environ Sci Technol. 2019 November 05; 53(21): 12348–12356. doi:10.1021/acs.est.9b03230. Poly- and Perfluoroalkyl Substances in Seawater and Plankton from the Northwestern Atlantic Margin Xianming Zhang†,‡,*, Rainer Lohmann§, Elsie M. Sunderland†,‡ †Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge MA USA 02138 ‡Department of Environmental Health, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Author Manuscript Public Health, Harvard University, Boston MA USA 02115 §Graduate School of Oceanography, University of Rhode Island Abstract The ocean is thought to be the terminal sink for poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) that have been produced and released in large quantities for more than 60 years. Regulatory actions have curbed production of legacy compounds such as perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) and perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) but impacts of regulations on PFAS releases to the marine environment are poorly understood. Here we report new data for 21 targeted PFAS in seawater and plankton from the coast, shelf and slope of the Northwestern Atlantic Ocean. We find strong inverse correlations between salinity and concentrations of most PFAS, indicating ongoing continental discharges are the major source to the marine environment. For legacy PFAS such as Author Manuscript PFOS and PFOA, a comparison of inland and offshore measurements from the same year (2014) suggests there are ongoing releases to the marine environment from sources such as submarine groundwater discharges. Vertical transport of most PFAS associated with settling particles from the surface 10 m to deeper waters is small compared to advective transport except for perfluorodecanoic acid: PFDA (35% of vertical flux) and precursor compounds to PFOS (up to 86%). We find higher than expected bioaccumulation factors (BAFs = Cplankton/Cwater) for perfluorinated carboxylic acids (PFCAs) with five and six carbons (log BAFs = 2.9-3.4) and linear PFOS (log BAF = 2.6-4.3) in marine plankton compared to PFCAs with 7-11 carbons. We postulate that this reflects additional contributions from precursor compounds. Known precursor compounds detected in this study have among the highest BAFs (log BAFs > 3.0) for all PFAS in this study, suggesting additional research on the bioaccumulation potential of unknown organofluorine compounds is urgently needed. Author Manuscript Graphical Abstract * Corresponding author: Xianming Zhang, xianming.zhang@gmail.com; Tel: 857-600-0969. Supporting Information Supporting Information Available: Additional figures and tables. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http:// pubs.acs.org. Zhang et al. Page 2 Author Manuscript Introduction Author Manuscript Poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a class of more than 4700 anthropogenic chemicals that have been widely produced since the 1950s for diverse commercial and industrial applications.1-3 Human exposures to PFAS have been associated with adverse health effects such as immune suppression and metabolic disruption.4 Seafood consumption is a major pathway for PFAS exposure, accounting for 86% of mean chronic adult exposure to perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) according to the 2018 review by the European Food Safety Authority.5,6 PFAS concentrations in seawater and marine plankton drive accumulation in marine food webs.7,8 Prior work has examined the distribution and composition of PFAS in seawater from different regions.8-16 However, there is still limited understanding of the how temporal shifts in sources and biogeochemical processes affect uptake and accumulation of PFAS at the base of marine food webs.8,17 Author Manuscript Regulatory actions targeting legacy PFAS such as PFOS have led to shifts chemical production toward PFAS with shorter carbon chains and polyfluoroalkyl compounds.18 PFOS and its precursors were voluntarily phased out by the main global manufacturer between 2000-200219 and the stewardship program by the US Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) for perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) has been very successful at reducing chemical production and environmental releases.20 However, many PFAS are not known to degrade21 and the ocean is thought to be the terminal sink following riverine transport through terrestrial ecosystems.22-24 Understanding the persistence of historical PFAS releases to the marine environment is thus important for characterizing exposure risks for wildlife and seafood consumers. Prior modeling work1,23,25 has aimed to better understand PFAS transport and accumulation Author Manuscript over large spatial and temporal scales. Given a lack of observational constraints, most modeling simulations have assumed transport of PFAS from terrestrial ecosystems to the ocean generally occurs within a year (Table S5)23 or that mixing with seawater occurs instantaneously following continental releases.26,27 This assumption limits the potential lag time between phase out of contamination sources and changes in inputs to marine regions. However, ongoing releases from historical stockpiles and PFAS contaminated groundwater, widely discussed in the context of drinking water, may result in delayed transport to ocean Environ Sci Technol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 30. Zhang et al. Page 3 margins through rivers and submarine groundwater discharges.28,29 Atmospheric transport Author Manuscript of precursor compounds that degrade into more stable end products is thought to be an important transport mechanism for some coastal regions.12,30,31 Contemporary measurements of PFOS concentrations and composition in coastal and offshore regions are needed to provide insight into such sources. Most traditional persistent organic pollutants (POPs) are hydrophobic and partition readily to suspended particles in aquatic ecosystems. Settling and burial of these particles provides an efficient removal mechanism for such compounds.32-34 By contrast, many PFAS are ionized in the aqueous environment and thus more hydrophilic and not volatile.35 Prior work has suggested that settling particles may still provide a significant removal pathway for PFAS in marine ecosystems.8 By contrast, the modeling work of Zhang et al.23 suggests vertical advection is the predominant pathway for PFOS to reach the deep North Atlantic Ocean and particle settling accounts for less than 1% of the PFOS removal from the surface Author Manuscript ocean. Additional data on concentrations of long and short chain PFAS in marine plankton are needed to support such inferences. The main objective of this work is to better understand factors affecting the distribution and abundance of PFAS in seawater and marine plankton from the ocean margin. We present new data on a suite of PFAS measured in samples collected from coastal/shelf and slope regions of the Northwestern Atlantic Ocean. We use these data to better understand: (1) the significance of continental discharges of freshwater as an ongoing source of legacy and new PFAS to the marine environment, (2) processes affecting the vertical distribution of PFAS in the marine water column, and (3) accumulation of PFAS at the base of the marine food web. Methods Author Manuscript Sample collection We collected surface (1-5 m depth) and subsurface (6-250 m) seawater samples from 21 coastal/shelf and slope stations using a CTD-Niskin bottle rosette array (SBE 911+, Sea- Bird Electronics) on board the R/V Endeavor between August 23-28, 2014. Sites occupied were located in the Northwestern Atlantic Ocean between Rhode Island Sound and the Eastern Shore of Virginia (41.43°N, 71.42°W – 36.55°N, 75.85°W, Figure 1, Table S1). This region is part of the Mid-Atlantic Basin and receives freshwater inputs from four major river systems (Hudson, Delaware, Susquehanna and Potomac, Figure 1). More than 60 million people reside within the watersheds of these rivers (approximately 20% of the US population). Sampling depths were selected based on in situ CTD measurements of the vertical profiles of temperature, salinity and Chl-a. Generally, we obtained one sample 2 m Author Manuscript above the seafloor and one sample at the depth where temperature, salinity and/or Chl-a showed substantial variation. Sample bottles (1L high-density polyethylene) were rinsed three times with methanol, air dried in a clean laboratory, and rinsed three times with seawater in the field before sampling. Salinity, temperature and chlorophyll a were also measured at each station using a CTD device on board (Table S1). Plankton were collected at selected stations by dragging a net (1 m2 opening, 335 μm mesh) at 1 m below the ocean surface for approximately 5 minutes Environ Sci Technol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 30. Zhang et al. Page 4 (stations 1, 6, 7, 10, 11, 14, and 15 on Figure 1). Samples were washed off the net with Author Manuscript seawater into an HDPE jar (1 L). All samples were stored at −20°C onboard and in the laboratory before analysis in 2016. PFAS Extraction and Analysis Seawater samples were extracted following the method by Taniyasu et. al.36 Before extraction, each sample was thawed to room temperature, spiked with 50 uL of 0.02 ng μL−1 mass labeled PFAS mixture (Wellington; Guelph, Canada) as internal standards and equilibrated overnight. Weak ion exchange SPE cartridges (Waters Oasis Wax, 6 mL, 150 mg sorbent) conditioned by sequentially eluting with 5 mL, 0.1% NH4OH in methanol, 5 mL methanol, and 5 mL milli-Q water were used to extract and concentrate PFAS in 1-litre bulk seawater. Samples were shaken vigorously for homogenization and loaded onto the SPE cartridges with a flow rate of 2 drops per second. After sample loading, each bottle was Author Manuscript rinsed with 20 mL milli-Q water and loaded to the SPE cartridge. The SPE cartridges were then washed with 5 mL 25 mM sodium acetate buffer before being eluted with 5 mL methanol and 5 mL of 0.1% NH4OH in methanol to a 15 mL polypropylene centrifuge tube (Corning). The extracts were concentrated to 0.5 mL using a ZIPVAP nitrogen evaporator, transferred to 1.5 mL polypropylene autosampler vials, and mixed with 0.5 mL milli-Q water before instrumental analysis. Plankton samples were first separated from the liquid phase via centrifugation. Each unfiltered sample was transferred to a 50 mL polypropylene centrifuge tube and centrifuged at 6000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant liquid was removed and the procedure repeated until all plankton were separated. Wet weights (ww) and dry weights after freeze drying overnight were recorded. For each plankton sample, approximately 2 g ww equivalent was placed in a 15 polypropylene centrifuge tube and spiked with 50 μL of 0.02 ng μL−1 mass Author Manuscript labeled PFAS mixture as internal standards (Wellington; Guelph, Canada, Table S2). Each sample was extracted twice by mixing with 4 mL 0.25 M sodium carbonate, 0.5 mL 0.5 M tetra-bultyl ammonium solution (pH =10) and 5 mL methyl-tert-butly ether (MBTE) on a horizontal mixer at 250 rpm for 30 min. The MBTE supernatants (10 mL) from the two extractions were combined and the solvent was further reduced to 0.5 mL methanol using a ZIPVAP nitrogen evaporator. The extract was transferred to a 1.5 mL polypropylene autosampler vial and mixed with 0.5 mL milli-Q water before instrumental analysis. Sample extracts were analyzed for 21 PFAS (Table S2 provides their full names and abbreviations) using an Agilent 6460 LC-MS/MS system equipped with an Agilent 1290 Infinity Flex Cube online-SPE. Each 300 μL extract was loaded into an Agilent Zorbax SB- Aq (4.6×12.5mm; 5μm) online SPE column and eluted with 0.85 mL 0.1% (v:v) formic acid Author Manuscript at a flow rate of 1 mL min−1. Analytes from the SPE column were loaded to an Agilent Poroshell 120 EC-C18 (3.0×50mm; 2.7μm) reverse phase HPLC column using ammonium acetate (2 mM) in methanol and water as the mobile phase. At a flow rate of 0.5 mL min−1, the elution gradient was linearly increased from 3% methanol to 60% for 7 minutes, held for 1 minute, then linearly increased to 100% methanol for 3 min, which was maintained until the end of the sample run (14 min). Environ Sci Technol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 30. Zhang et al. Page 5 At the LC-MS interface, the capillary voltage was set at −3.8 kV and nitrogen nebulizer gas was set at 45 psi and 13 L min−1. Analytes were introduced to the tandem mass spectrometer Author Manuscript after being ionized with an electrospray ionization source operated in negative ion mode at 300 °C. The dynamic multiple reaction monitoring mode (5.0 grade N2 as the collision gas) was used for data acquisition. To eliminate any potential carry-over, methanol was injected and passed through the system after every sample (or calibration standard). Branched isomers for PFOA and PFOS were quantified using calibration standards for the linear isomers, assuming the same instrumental response factor. For PFAS with detection frequencies of greater than 70% (Table S3), we include non-detects in statistical analyses using the Robust Regression on Order Statistics approach

research on the bioaccumulation potential of unknown organofluorine compounds is urgently needed. Author Manuscript Graphical Abstract * Corresponding author: Xianming Zhang, xianming.zhang@gmail.com; Tel: 857-600-0969. Supporting Information Supporting Information Available: Additional figures and tables. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http:// pubs.acs.org. Zhang et al. Page 2 Author Manuscript Introduction Author Manuscript Poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a class of more than 4700 anthropogenic chemicals that have been widely produced since the 1950s for diverse commercial and industrial applications.1-3 Human exposures to PFAS have been associated with adverse health effects such as immune suppression and metabolic disruption.4 Seafood consumption is a major pathway for PFAS exposure, accounting for 86% of mean chronic adult exposure to perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) according to the 2018 review by the European Food Safety Authority.5,6 PFAS concentrations in seawater and marine plankton drive accumulation in marine food webs.7,8 Prior work has examined the distribution and composition of PFAS in seawater from different regions.8-16 However, there is still limited understanding of the how temporal shifts in sources and biogeochemical processes affect uptake and accumulation of PFAS at the base of marine food webs.8,17 Author Manuscript Regulatory actions targeting legacy PFAS such as PFOS have led to shifts chemical production tow  additional research on the bioaccumulation potential of unknown organofluorine compounds is urgently needed. Author Manuscript Graphical Abstract * Corresponding author: Xianming Zhang, xianming.zhang@gmail.com; Tel: 857-600-0969. Supporting Information Supporting Information Available: Additional figures and tables. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http:// pubs.acs.org. Zhang et al. Page 2 Author Manuscript Introduction Author Manuscript Poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a class of more than 4700 anthropogenic chemicals that have been widely produced since the 1950s for diverse commercial and industrial applications.1-3 Human exposures to PFAS have been associated with adverse health effects such as immune suppression and metabolic disruption.4 Seafood consumption is a major pathway for PFAS exposure, accounting for 86% of mean chronic adult exposure to perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) according to the 2018 review by the European Food Safety Authority.5,6 PFAS concentrations in seawater and marine plankton drive accumulation in marine food webs.7,8 Prior work has examined the distribution and composition of PFAS in seawater from different regions.8-16 However, there is still limited understanding of the how temporal shifts in sources and biogeochemical processes affect uptake and accumulation of PFAS at the base of marine food webs.8,17 Author Manuscript Regulatory actions targeting legacy PFAS such as PFOS have led to shifts chemical pro continental releases.26,27 This assumption limits the potential lag time between phase out of contamination sources and changes in inputs to marine regions. However, ongoing releases from historical stockpiles and PFAS contaminated groundwater, widely discussed in the context of drinking water, may result in delayed transport to ocean Environ Sci Technol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 30. Zhang et al. Page 3 margins through rivers and submarine groundwater discharges.28,29 Atmospheric transport Author Manuscript of precursor compounds that degrade into more stable end products is thought to be an important transport mechanism for some coastal regions.12,30,31 Contemporary measurements of PFOS concentrations and composition in coastal and offshore regions are needed to provide insight into such sources. Most traditional persistent organic pollutants (POPs) are hydrophobic and partition readily to suspended particles in aquatic ecosystems. Settling and burial of these particles provides an efficient removal mechanism for such compounds.32-34 By contrast, many PFAS are ionized in the aqueous environment and thus more hydrophilic and not volatile.35 Prior work has suggested that settling particles may still provide a significant removal pathway for PFAS in marine ecosystems.8 By contrast, the modeling work of Zhang et al.23 suggests vertical advection is the predominant pathway for PFOS to reach the deep North Atlantic Ocean and particle settling accounts for less th ns with duplicate samples are reported as averaged values. Five field blanks (1L HPLC grade water added to the CTD tube and then transferred to the sampling bottle), prepared following the same sample preparation procedures as described above, were all below instrument detection limits. Results and Discussion PFAS detection, and concentrations in seawater Eight of the targeted 21 PFAS (PFBS, PFHxS, PFOS, PFHxA, PFHpA, PFOA, PFNA and PFDA) were detected in over 70% of the surface seawater samples (Table S3). The remaining 13 PFAS were detected in less than 40% of all the samples. Summed Author Manuscript concentrations of the eight frequently detected PFAS (Σ8PFAS) were <660-4070 pg L−1 in surface seawater samples and <470-3970 pg L−1 in subsurface samples. The most abundant PFAS in surface and subsurface seawater were PFOS (linear + branched: <110-910 pg L−1), PFHxA (<155-1000 pg L−1) and PFOA (linear + branched: <93-900 pg L−1) (Figure 2, Table S3). In all the 20 surface seawater samples collected in this study, PFOS (linear + branched) exceeded the European environmental quality standard (130 pg L−1, based on annual average exposure).40 Environ Sci Technol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 30. Zhang et al. Page 6 The highest concentration of Σ8PFAS in both surface and subsurface seawater was found at Author Manuscript Station 11 near Delaware Bay (Figure 1). Surface seawater from Station 11 had the highest concentrations of PFOS (830 pg L−1), and PFCAs (PFHxA: 1000, P  such as the C-5 and C-6 PFCAs and PFOS should be considered in regulatory evaluations of risks associated with source releases. Data presented here indicate inventories that only account for direct releases of PFCAs and PFSAs may underestimate bioaccumulation in marine food webs. Author Manuscript Supplementary Material Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material. Acknowledgements We acknowledge financial support for this study from the Smith Family Foundation, the U.S. National Science Foundation (PLR 1203496), the Rhode Island Endeavor Program (RIEP) for support of EN 545, the Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences TomKat fund, and the NIH Superfund Research Program (P42ES027706). XZ acknowledges a Postdoctoral Fellowship from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC). We thank Caoxin Sun (University of Rhode Island), Lynne Butler (R/V Endeavor), and the crew for assistance with field sample collection. References Author Manuscript 1. Armitage JM; Schenker U; Scheringer M; Martin JW; MacLeod M; Cousins IT, Modeling the Global Fate and Transport of Perfluorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS) and Precursor Compounds in Relation to Temporal Trends in Wildlife Exposure. Environ. Sci. Technol 2009, 43, 9274–9280. [PubMed: 20000520] 2. Wang ZY; Cousins IT; Scheringer M; Buck RC; Hungerbuhler K, Global emission inventories for C-4-C-14 perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acid (PFCA) homologues from 1951 to 2030, Part I: production  acid (PFOA) but impacts of regulations on PFAS releases to the marine environment are poorly understood. Here we report new data for 21 targeted PFAS in seawater and plankton from the coast, shelf and slope of the Northwestern Atlantic Ocean. We find strong inverse correlations between salinity and concentrations of most PFAS, indicating ongoing continental discharges are the major source to the marine environment. For legacy PFAS such as Author Manuscript PFOS and PFOA, a comparison of inland and offshore measurements from the same year (2014) suggests there are ongoing releases to the marine environment from sources such as submarine groundwater discharges. Vertical transport of most PFAS associated with settling particles from the surface 10 m to deeper waters is small compared to advective transport except for perfluorodecanoic acid: PFDA (35% of vertical flux) and precursor compounds to PFOS (up to 86%). We find higher than expected bioaccumulation factors (BAFs = Cplankton/Cwater) for perfluorinated carboxylic acids (PFCAs) with five and six carbons (log BAFs = 2.9-3.4) and linear PFOS (log BAF = 2.6-4.3) in marine plankton compared to PFCAs with 7-11 carbons. We postulate that this reflects additional contributions from precursor compounds. Known precursor compounds detected in this study have among the highest BAFs (log BAFs > 3.0) for all PFAS in this study, suggesting additional research on the bioaccumulation potential of unknown organofluorine compounds is urgently needed. Aut onment via riverine discharge. These values ranged from 510 pg L−1 for PFDA to 6750 pg L−1 for PFOS and fall within the range of PFAS concentrations we measured in inland and estuarine surface water from the same region in the same year (Table S5).22 The ratios between the regression intercepts and median inland surface water concentrations should be close to one if all PFAS in nearshore seawater originated from continental discharges. We find the ratios for PFOS (8.9) and PFNA (6.7) are much higher than the Environ Sci Technol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 30. Zhang et al. Page 7 range 2.0-3.0 for most PFAS (Table S5). This suggests seawater concentrations of PFOS and Author Manuscript PFNA reflect a combination of ongoing inputs from rivers and legacy accumulation from historic discharges. Submarine groundwater discharge is an important hydrological process for the coastal and shelf region of this study.43 In groundwater, PFAS have much longer transport times from sources to marine ecosystems than surface water.28,29 For PFBS, only 25% of the variability in measured concentrations can be explained by salinity (Figure 3F) and loadings of PC2 are high (Figure 3B). PFBS and its precursors such as methyl perfluorobutane sulfonamide (MeFBSA) and sulfonamidoethanol (MeFBSE) are being produced as a replacement for PFOS and transformation of volatile precursors can result in. deposition of PFBS to the surface ocean.1,44,45 Highest concentrations of PFBS were detected  eflects ongoing inputs from rivers. The intercepts of the regressions between individual PFAS in coastal/shelf seawater and salinity (Table S5) Author Manuscript provide an indication of PFAS concentrations in continental releases entering the marine environment via riverine discharge. These values ranged from 510 pg L−1 for PFDA to 6750 pg L−1 for PFOS and fall within the range of PFAS concentrations we measured in inland and estuarine surface water from the same region in the same year (Table S5).22 The ratios between the regression intercepts and median inland surface water concentrations should be close to one if all PFAS in nearshore seawater originated from continental discharges. We find the ratios for PFOS (8.9) and PFNA (6.7) are much higher than the Environ Sci Technol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 30. Zhang et al. Page 7 range 2.0-3.0 for most PFAS (Table S5). This suggests seawater concentrations of PFOS and Author Manuscript PFNA reflect a combination of ongoing inputs from rivers and legacy accumulation from historic discharges. Submarine groundwater discharge is an important hydrological process for the coastal and shelf region of this study.43 In groundwater, PFAS have much longer transport times from sources to marine ecosystems than surface water.28,29 For PFBS, only 25% of the variability in measured concentrations can be explained by salinity (Figure 3F) and loadings of PC2 are high (Figure 3B). PFBS and its precursors such as methyl perfluo

ll 2012, 64, 902–6. [PubMed: 22472786] Author Manuscript 67. Xie W; Bothun GD; Lehmler H-J, Partitioning of perfluorooctanoate into phosphatidylcholine bilayers is chain length-independent. Chem. Phys. Lipids 2010, 163, 300–308. [PubMed: 20096277] 68. Dassuncao C; Hu XC; Zhang X; Bossi R; Dam M; Mikkelsen B; Sunderland EM, Temporal Shifts in Poly- and Perfluoroalkyl Substances (PFASs) in North Atlantic Pilot Whales Indicate Large Contribution of Atmospheric Precursors. Environ. Sci. Technol 2017, 51, 4512–4521. [PubMed: 28350446] 69. Wagner CC; Amos HM; Thackray CP; Zhang Y; Lundgren EW; Forget G; Friedman CL; Selin NE; Lohmann R; Sunderland EM, A Global 3-D Ocean Model for PCBs: Benchmark Compounds for Understanding the Impacts of Global Change on Neutral Persistent Organic Pollutants. Global Biogeochem Cy 2019, 33, 469–481. 70. Sanchez-Vidal A; Llorca M; Farré M; Canals M; Barceló D; Puig P; Calafat A, Delivery of unprecedented amounts of perfluoroalkyl substances towards the deep-sea. Sci. Total Environ 2015, 526, 41–48. [PubMed: 25918891] 71. Marshall J; Hill C; Perelman L; Adcroft A, Hydrostatic, quasi-hydrostatic, and nonhydrostatic Author Manuscript ocean modeling. J Geophys Res-Oceans 1997, 102, 5733–5752. 72. Wunsch C; Heimbach P, Practical global oceanic state estimation. Physica D 2007, 230, 197–208. 73. Miyake Y; Yamashita N; Rostkowski P; So MK; Taniyasu S; Lam PK; Kannan K, Determination of trace levels of total fluorine in water using combustion ion chromatography for fluorine: a mass balance approach to determine individual perfluorinated chemicals in water. J. Chromatogr. A 2007, 1143, 98–104. [PubMed: 17229428] Environ Sci Technol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 30. Zhang et al. Page 15 Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Figure 1. Locations of sampling stations for seawater and plankton (denoted by *) for analysis of Author Manuscript poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). Stations were occupied as part of the ENV545 cruise on the R/V Endeavor between August 23-28, 2014. Blue arrows indicate predominant directions of ocean currents in the region. Author Manuscript Environ Sci Technol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 30. Zhang et al. Page 16 Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Figure 2. Concentrations of the eight frequently detected PFAS in seawater from the Northwestern Atlantic Ocean margin. Panel (A) shows coastal/shelf sites and Panel (B) shows slope sites. The Limit of Detection (LOD, Table S3) for each PFAS is indicated by the dotted line. Surface samples are denoted by light green/orange colors and subsurface samples are colored dark green/orange. Significantly different concentrations based on paired one-tailed t-tests for log-transformed concentrations at p < 0.05 is denoted by * and by ** for p-values <0.01. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Environ Sci Technol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 30. Zhang et al. Page 17 Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Figure 3. Relationship between concentrations of PFAS in seawater and salinity. Numbers on the plot Author Manuscript correspond to sampling stations shown in Figure 1. Surface and subsurface sites are indicated by light and dark colors. Coastal/shelf stations are green and slope stations are orange. Panels (A) and (B) show scores and loadings of principal component analysis (PCA) on log-transformed and unit variance scaled PFAS concentrations. Panel (C) shows the correlation between PC1 scores and salinity (rs = 0.88, p<0.001). Panels (D-F) show linear relationships between PFOS, PFOA and PFBS in seawater from coastal/shelf stations. Figure S1 and Table S5 show relationships for other PFAS. Author Manuscript Environ Sci Technol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 30. Zhang et al. Page 18 Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Figure 4. Empirically derived bioaccumulation factors (BAFs) for marine plankton (L kg−1 wet weight) for linear perfluorocarboxylic acids (PFCAs, panel A and B) and linear (n-) and branched (br-) perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS, panel C) as a function of their carbon chain lengths. The regression line based on all data for the C7 to C11 PFCAs is shown by the black line of panel (B) and the grey shaded region represents the 95% confidence interval of predictions. Colored lines in panel (B) indicate regressions across individual sampling stations. Symbols indicate individual measurements. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Environ Sci Technol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 30. Zhang et al. Page 19 Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Figure 5. Vertical profiles of PFAS, chlorophyll a (mg L−1, green dot line), salinity (PSU, purple dash- dot line) and temperature (°C, orange dash line). Concentrations of PFOS and PFOA include both linear and branched isomers. Data for all the other sites are presented in Figure S4. Author Manuscript Environ Sci Technol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 30.