Environmental Forensics ISSN: 1527-5922 (Print) 1527-5930 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/uenf20 A forensic approach for distinguishing PFAS materials Mark J. Benotti, Loretta A. Fernandez, Graham F. Peaslee, Gregory S. Douglas, Allen D. Uhler & Stephen Emsbo-Mattingly To cite this article: Mark J. Benotti, Loretta A. Fernandez, Graham F. Peaslee, Gregory S. Douglas, Allen D. Uhler & Stephen Emsbo-Mattingly (2020) A forensic approach for distinguishing PFAS materials, Environmental Forensics, 21:3-4, 319-333, DOI: 10.1080/15275922.2020.1771631 To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/15275922.2020.1771631 View supplementary material Published online: 12 Jul 2020. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2039 View related articles View Crossmark data Citing articles: 13 View citing articles Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=uenf20 ENVIRONMENTAL FORENSICS 2020, VOL. 21, NOS. 3–4, 319–333 https://doi.org/10.1080/15275922.2020.1771631 A forensic approach for distinguishing PFAS materials Mark J. Benottia, Loretta A. Fernandezb, Graham F. Peasleec, Gregory S. Douglasa, Allen D. Uhlera, and Stephen Emsbo-Mattinglya a NewFields Environmental Forensics Practice, LLC, Rockland, Massachusetts, USA; bDepartment of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; cDepartment of Physics, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA ABSTRACT KEYWORDS The widespread detection of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) throughout the PFAS; forensics; source world and the ongoing proliferation of environmental regulations has prompted the need attribution; AFFF; food for a forensic approach for the source attribution of PFAS. Current LC-MS/MS standard contact materials; LC-MS; LC-MS/MS methods are sensitive and robust, but only characterize a small fraction of the total poten- tial PFAS signature. Other, more powerful analytical tools such as HRMS exist, and have been used to characterize some of the unknown or “non-target” fraction of PFAS, but these methods are expensive and not widely available. This paper presents a tiered approach to PFAS forensics based on standard methods and/or other relatively inexpensive methodolo- gies. The approach outlined herein is broken into three tiers, including (1) a screening method to assess the general characteristics of the bulk PFAS signature; (2) a standard method to sensitively measure PFAS compounds of regulatory interest; and (3) a method for resolving the isomer patterns of select PFAS compounds. The combination of these read- ily accessible methods is illustrated herein with different source materials, including aqueous film forming foam (AFFF) concentrate samples and food contact materials (FCMs). The tiered PFAS forensic approach bridges the gap between ground breaking academic methods and production laboratory throughput for the purpose of identifying valuable forensic informa- tion available in PFAS source materials. Introduction and domestic applications, including, but not limited to food contact materials (FCMs), non-stick cookware, Scientists and regulators have devoted significant attention to the presence of per- and polyfluoroalkyl water-repellent clothing, stain resistant fabrics and substances (PFAS), particularly perfluorooctane sul- carpets, cosmetics, and other products that resist fonate (PFOS) and perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), in grease, water, and oil. PFAS can enter the environ- the environment over the last two decades. Such ment via discharge from manufacturing operations efforts have raised concerns about the vulnerability of (Shin et al., 2011; Sun et al., 2016), domestic or indus- drinking water supplies, as they can be particularly trial wastewater discharge (Schultz et al., 2006; susceptible to contamination (Quinones and Snyder, Loganathan et al., 2007; Sun et al., 2016), biosolids 2009; Hu et al., 2016) given the relatively high solubil- application (Gottschall et al., 2010; Venkatesan and ity and relative ease of environmental transport of Halden, 2013), landfill leachate (Lang et al., 2017), PFAS. Often, the presence of PFAS in drinking water AFFFs use or training (Backe et al., 2013; D’Agostino supplies has resulted in litigation involving the likely and Mabury, 2014; Barzen-Hanson et al., 2017; Mejia- source of the contamination, usually firefighting activ- Avendano et al., 2017), or other waste streams. Source ities that included the use of aqueous film forming attribution of PFAS in water supplies proximate to a foams (AFFFs; for example see the following news- single probable source can be a relatively simple pro- paper articles describing AFFF-related lawsuits, cess, although even under such a circumstance the Chinese, 2018; Robinson, 2018; Spillane, 2017). potential for some background level of PFAS may However, PFAS are also used in many other industrial warrant consideration. However, the widespread use CONTACT Mark J. Benotti mbenotti@newfields.com NewFields Environmental Forensics Practice, LLC, 300 Ledgewood Place, Suite 305, Rockland, MA 02360, USA Supplemental data for this article is available online at https://doi.org/10.1080/15275922.2020.1771631 ß 2020 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group 320 M. J. BENOTTI ET AL. and disposal/discharge of PFAS-containing materials standard methods (Place and Field, 2012; Barzen- in complex and/or urbanized areas often reflects con- Hanson et al., 2017; Robel et al., 2017). The work pre- tributions from multiple sources. Therefore, source sented herein describes methods for characterizing a attribution is needed as part of environmental site broader range of PFAS related compounds for the investigations and liability assessments for PFAS source attribution purposes. contamination. A comprehensive characterization of the PFAS not One challenge of source attribution is that existing captured by standard methods (i.e., the “non-target” standard analytical methods target only a fraction of PFAS) is challenging, as it requires analytical tools not the total, and often unknown PFAS signature. In other typically employed by standard methods or found in words, standard methods only capture a fraction of all commercial laboratories. For example, D’Agostino and of the PFAS compounds present in source material Mabury (2014) used liquid chromatography with (Robel et al., 2017) or the environment (Houtz et al., quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (LC- 2013). Understanding a more holistic PFAS signature QToF-MS) to identify 103 new PFAS compounds in source materials and in environmental samples is from 10 different PFAS classes in 10 AFFF concen- integral to source attribution. trates and two fluorinated surfactants. Barzen-Hanson Analytical methods for PFAS compounds have et al. (2017) also used QToF-MS to identify 40 new largely developed around the availability of analytical classes of PFAS in AFFF concentrates and AFFF- standards. The earliest methods focused on PFOA and impacted groundwater and were able to identify that PFOS (Hansen et al., 2002), compounds that generated 34 of those classes were derived from the electrochem- the initial concerns over human exposure (Gilliland ical fluorination (ECF) process and had the same base and Mandel, 1993; Olsen et al., 1999). In 2009, the structure. While high resolution mass spectrometry USEPA published EPA Method 537, which targeted (HRMS) techniques like QToF-MS are the “gold fourteen (14) individual PFAS compounds, including standard” for characterizing a more holistic PFAS sig- PFOA, PFOS, perfluorobutanesulfonic acid (PFBS), per- nature due to their ability to sensitively identify and fluorohexanesulfonic acid (PFHxS), perfluorohexanoic quantify non-target compounds, such instrumentation acid (PFHxA), perfluoroheptanoic acid (PFHpA), per- is expensive and the data interpretation is both com- fluorononanoic acid (PFNA), perfluorodecanoic acid plex and time-consuming. Consequently, HRMS is (PFDA), perfluoroundecanoic acid (PFUnA), perfluoro- often prohibitively expensive for commercial laborato- dodecanoic acid (PFDoA), perfluorotridecanoic acid ries and/or logistically impractical for analysing a large (PFTrDA), perfluorotetradecanoic acid (PFTA), N-ethyl number of samples such as may be required for a perfluorooctanesulfonamidoacetic acid (NEtFOSAA), contaminated site investigation. and N-methyl perfluorooctanesulfonamidoacetic acid In addition to characterizing non-target PFAS, valu- (NMeFOSAA). Subsequently, USEPA promulgated its able forensic information may be found in the isomer third unregulated contaminant monitoring rule patterns of target PFAS compounds. Manufacturers (UCMR3) to collect information on the occurrence of have employed two primary PFAS manufacturing proc- PFAS in US drinking water (USEPA, 2017). The esses: ECF and telomerization. ECF is a process by UCMR3 target analytes included PFOA, PFOS, PFBS, which hydrogen atoms of raw materials are electrolytic- PFHxS, PFHpA and PFNA. Presently, laboratories ally replaced by fluorine atoms using anhydrous hydro- employ EPA Method 537, EPA Method 533, EPA fluoric acid, resulting in a finished product with both Method 8327, a proprietary isotope dilution method branched and linear isomers (Alsmeyer et al., 1994). compliant with Table B-15 of the US Department of 3M manufactured PFOS and PFOA in the United Defense Consolidated Quality Systems Manual for States using the ECF process until they phased out pro- Environmental Laboratories, or similar methods to duction between 2000 and 2002. Telomerization is a measure up to a few dozen individual PFAS com- process by which raw material, a perfluoroiodide, pounds in water, solids, or tissues. These analytical termed the “telogen,” is reacted with tetrafluoroethyl- methodologies provide sensitive and high-volume com- ene, termed the “taxogen.” An additional step often mercial solutions for contemporary site assessments, occurs whereby the PFAS is further reacted with ethyl- albeit for only a limited list of PFAS compounds. At ene to produce a PFAS that contains a perfluorinated the same time, however, scientists have shown that alkyl chain, a -CH2CH2- bridge, and a functional there are hundreds of PFAS compounds potentially group. PFAS produced by telomerization have two present in source materials or the environment for important features. First, the process produces PFAS which there are neither analytical standards nor monomers that are -C2F4- units, or 100 Da apart, ENVIRONMENTAL FORENSICS 321 reflective of the taxogen building blocks. Second, the information stemming from diagnostic ratios, or other production of PFAS by telomerization produces linear situations requiring the determination of trace-level isomers with little to no branched isomers (Benskin, concentrations of target PFAS compounds. De Silva, et al., 2010; Buck et al., 2011). Tier 3 methods focus on the isomer distributions Analytical methodologies that contain sufficient of select PFAS compounds. Such methods could be chromatographic resolution to separate branched and used to confirm or rule out a particular source or dis- linear isomers may provide valuable information per- tinguish different sources. Recognizing that each taining to source identification. Benskin et al. (2010) environmental forensic investigation is unique, the showed that the ratios of two separate branched tiered analytical approach should be combined with PFOA isomers to the linear isomer in samples col- an understanding of site history/operations and a con- lected from Shanghai, the Japan Sea, and the ceptual site model, to the extent possible. Depending Mississippi River were matched a 3M-produced PFOA on the scenario, specific tiers may or may not be source material, whereas a sample from Tokyo Bay required. This work highlights an approach that col- did not. Diagnostic isomer ratios offer greatest prom- lects a range of PFAS information, from very general ise for forensic investigations with identifiable source to very specific, to illustrate the forensic value of each materials; however, care is recommended when source tier and to lay the groundwork to distinguish a broad materials are unknown because variability in manufac- range of potential PFAS sources and support litigation turing over time requires more detailed examination. over PFAS occurrence. The same authors note that PFOS isomer profiles vary between human biological samples, specifically between Australia serum/UK plasma and Sweden Methods plasma likely due to a combination of pharmacoki- Samples netic and/or source factors between these populations (Benskin et al., 2010). Four different AFFF concentrates and five different This paper outlines an approach to PFAS forensics FCMs were analyzed. While it was known that the that includes three tiers of analyses that can be con- AFFF concentrates represent current use products (i.e., ducted using instrumentation readily available in most they represent formulations that were created in commercial laboratories or by relatively inexpensive response to the 2010/2015 PFOA Stewardship Program), methodologies. Tier 1 utilizes a screening tool to neither the manufacturer

A. Presently, laboratories ally replaced by fluorine atoms using anhydrous hydro- employ EPA Method 537, EPA Method 533, EPA fluoric acid, resulting in a finished product with both Method 8327, a proprietary isotope dilution method branched and linear isomers (Alsmeyer et al., 1994). compliant with Table B-15 of the US Department of 3M manufactured PFOS and PFOA in the United Defense Consolidated Quality Systems Manual for States using the ECF process until they phased out pro- Environmental Laboratories, or similar methods to duction between 2000 and 2002. Telomerization is a measure up to a few dozen individual PFAS com- process by which raw material, a perfluoroiodide, pounds in water, solids, or tissues. These analytical termed the “telogen,” is reacted with tetrafluoroethyl- methodologies provide sensitive and high-volume com- ene, termed the “taxogen.” An additional step often mercial solutions for contemporary site assessments, occurs whereby the PFAS is further reacted with ethyl- albeit for only a limited list of PFAS compounds. At ene to produce a PFAS that contains a perfluorinated the same time, however, scientists have shown that alkyl chain, a -CH2CH2- bridge, and a functional there are hundreds of PFAS compounds potentially group. PFAS produced by telomerization have two present in source materials or the environment for important features. First, the process produces PFAS which there are neither analytical standards nor monomers that are -C2F4- units, or 100 Da apa nt FCMs (e.g., general molecular weight size distribution, evi- were regulated prior to 2016 and in use in the US prior dence for manufacturing by telomerization, etc.). Tier to 2011. The structures of the FCMs were known, and 2 utilizes a standard method to sensitively and defens- are presented in Figure 1. ibly measure concentrations of target PFAS for regula- tory compliance. Tier 3 utilizes a method to look at Analytical methodologies the isomer pattern of select PFAS compounds. The Tier 1 screening tool may be non-specific, such as Four different analytical methods representing tech- particle induced gamma emission (PIGE); specific, nologies from the three forensic tiers of analyses were such as liquid chromatography with either mass spec- used to characterize several potential source materials. trometry or tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS or It is important to note that the analytical tools LC-MS/MS); or highly specific, such as HRMS. The described in this paper do not represent all analytical general goal of the screening tool is to collect infor- tools that may be used for PFAS forensics. It is antici- mation on the total PFAS content, with the general, pated that other forensic methods will emerge in the specific and highly specific classifications offering future capable of complementing or replacing those increasing levels of information on the nature of the currently in the tiered structure as technologies total PFAS signature as well as increasing cost. advance and case atively high solubil- application (Gottschall et al., 2010; Venkatesan and ity and relative ease of environmental transport of Halden, 2013), landfill leachate (Lang et al., 2017), PFAS. Often, the presence of PFAS in drinking water AFFFs use or training (Backe et al., 2013; D’Agostino supplies has resulted in litigation involving the likely and Mabury, 2014; Barzen-Hanson et al., 2017; Mejia- source of the contamination, usually firefighting activ- Avendano et al., 2017), or other waste streams. Source ities that included the use of aqueous film forming attribution of PFAS in water supplies proximate to a foams (AFFFs; for example see the following news- single probable source can be a relatively simple pro- paper articles describing AFFF-related lawsuits, cess, although even under such a circumstance the Chinese, 2018; Robinson, 2018; Spillane, 2017). potential for some background level of PFAS may However, PFAS are also used in many other industrial warrant consideration. However, the widespread use CONTACT Mark J. Benotti mbenotti@newfields.com NewFields Environmental Forensics Practice, LLC, 300 Ledgewood Place, Suite 305, Rockland, MA 02360, USA Supplemental data for this article is available online at https://doi.org/10.1080/15275922.2020.1771631 ß 2020 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group 320 M. J. BENOTTI ET AL. and disposal/discharge of PFAS-containing materials standard methods (Place and Field, 2012; Barzen- in complex and/or urbanized areas often refle fied in source mate- not specifically identified (e.g., other non-fluorinated rials, MS/MS can be used to confirm the structures of surfactants) may be present. To the extent that other measured compounds. These details are discussed in non-PFAS components are captured by the sample the results and discussion section. preparation, they will also be present in the resultant Full-scan LC-MS was used to characterize the LC-MS analysis and could provide valuable compli- extent and nature of PFAS in the four AFFF foam mentary information for linking a particularly PFAS concentrates and five FCMs using a Sciex 4500 LC- signature to a specific source. MS/MS equipped with a Shimadzu UHPLC. AFFF A robust quality assurance program featuring qual- samples were diluted to 26 mg/mL in laboratory grade ity control (QC) samples, standards, replicates, and water before analysis. FCMs were dissolved in metha- blanks assures a known degree of precision, accuracy, nol and diluted to 1 mg/mL. The mobile phase con- representativeness, comparability, and sensitivity. The sisted of 10 mM ammonium formate in water (A) and analysis of blanks with every sample is particularly 10 mM of ammonium formate in methanol (B). LC important when analysing for non-target materials, separation was achieved on an Acquity UPLCV R BEH PFAS or otherwise, that may confound interpretation. C18 analytical column (2.1  50 mm, 1.7 mm), using a To that end, instrument blanks matching the solvents 0.200 mL/min mobile phase flow rat dez, Graham F. Peaslee, Gregory S. Douglas, Allen D. Uhler & Stephen Emsbo-Mattingly (2020) A forensic approach for distinguishing PFAS materials, Environmental Forensics, 21:3-4, 319-333, DOI: 10.1080/15275922.2020.1771631 To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/15275922.2020.1771631 View supplementary material Published online: 12 Jul 2020. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2039 View related articles View Crossmark data Citing articles: 13 View citing articles Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=uenf20 ENVIRONMENTAL FORENSICS 2020, VOL. 21, NOS. 3–4, 319–333 https://doi.org/10.1080/15275922.2020.1771631 A forensic approach for distinguishing PFAS materials Mark J. Benottia, Loretta A. Fernandezb, Graham F. Peasleec, Gregory S. Douglasa, Allen D. Uhlera, and Stephen Emsbo-Mattinglya a NewFields Environmental Forensics Practice, LLC, Rockland, Massachusetts, USA; bDepartment of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; cDepartment of Physics, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA ABSTRACT KEYWORDS The widespread detection of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) throughout the PFAS; forensics; source world and the ongoing proliferation of environmental regulations has prompted the need attribution; AFFF; food for a forensic approach for the source attribution of PFAS. Current LC-MS/MS standard contact materia t, ENVIRONMENTAL FORENSICS 321 reflective of the taxogen building blocks. Second, the information stemming from diagnostic ratios, or other production of PFAS by telomerization produces linear situations requiring the determination of trace-level isomers with little to no branched isomers (Benskin, concentrations of target PFAS compounds. De Silva, et al., 2010; Buck et al., 2011). Tier 3 methods focus on the isomer distributions Analytical methodologies that contain sufficient of select PFAS compounds. Such methods could be chromatographic resolution to separate branched and used to confirm or rule out a particular source or dis- linear isomers may provide valuable information per- tinguish different sources. Recognizing that each taining to source identification. Benskin et al. (2010) environmental forensic investigation is unique, the showed that the ratios of two separate branched tiered analytical approach should be combined with PFOA isomers to the linear isomer in samples col- an understanding of site history/operations and a con- lected from Shanghai, the Japan Sea, and the ceptual site model, to the extent possible. Depending Mississippi River were matched a 3M-produced PFOA on the scenario, specific tiers may or may not be source material, whereas a sample from Tokyo Bay required. This work highlights an approach that col- did not. Diagnostic isomer ratios offer greatest prom- lects a range of PFAS information, from very general ise for forensic investigations with identifiable  and Field, 2012; Barzen- in complex and/or urbanized areas often reflects con- Hanson et al., 2017; Robel et al., 2017). The work pre- tributions from multiple sources. Therefore, source sented herein describes methods for characterizing a attribution is needed as part of environmental site broader range of PFAS related compounds for the investigations and liability assessments for PFAS source attribution purposes. contamination. A comprehensive characterization of the PFAS not One challenge of source attribution is that existing captured by standard methods (i.e., the “non-target” standard analytical methods target only a fraction of PFAS) is challenging, as it requires analytical tools not the total, and often unknown PFAS signature. In other typically employed by standard methods or found in words, standard methods only capture a fraction of all commercial laboratories. For example, D’Agostino and of the PFAS compounds present in source material Mabury (2014) used liquid chromatography with (Robel et al., 2017) or the environment (Houtz et al., quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (LC- 2013). Understanding a more holistic PFAS signature QToF-MS) to identify 103 new PFAS compounds in source materials and in environmental samples is from 10 different PFAS classes in 10 AFFF concen- integral to source attribution. trates and two fluorinated surfactants. Barzen-Hanson Analytical methods for PFAS compounds have et al. (2017) also used QToF-MS to identify 40 new largely develo

 S., Butenhoff, References J. L., and Dick, L. A. 2002. Quantitative characterization of trace levels of PFOS and PFOA in the Tennessee river. Alsmeyer, Y. W. W. V., Childs, R. M., Flynn, G. C., Moore, Environmental Science & Technology 36(8):1681–1685. and Smeltzer, J. C. 1994. Electrochemical fluorination and Herzke, D., Olsson, E., and Posner, S. 2012. Perfluoroalkyl its applications. In Organofluorine Chemistry: Principles and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) in consumer ENVIRONMENTAL FORENSICS 333 products in Norway - a pilot study. Chemosphere 88(8): a screening tool for per- and polyfluorinated substances 980–987. in papers and textiles. Nuclear Instruments and Methods Houtz, E. F., Higgins, C. P., Field, J. A., and Sedlak, D. L. in Physics Research Section B: Beam Interactions with 2013. Persistence of perfluoroalkyl acid precursors in Materials and Atoms 407:47–54. AFFF-impacted groundwater and soil. Environmental Robel, A. E., Marshall, K., Dickinson, M., Lunderberg, D., Science & Technology 47(15):8187–8195. Butt, C., Peaslee, G., et al. 2017. Closing the mass balance Hu, X. D. C., Andrews, D. Q., Lindstrom, A. B., Bruton, on fluorine on papers and textiles. Environmental Science T. A., Schaider, L. A., Grandjean, P., et al. 2016. & Technology 51(16):9022–9032. Detection of poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) Robinson, K. 2018, June 26. ECUA sues national manufac- in US drinking water linked to industrial sites, military turers over contamination of Escambia water wells. fire training areas, and wastewater treatment plants. Pensacola News Journal. Environmental Science & Technology Letters 3(10): Schaider, L. A., Balan, S. A., Blum, A., Andrews, D. Q., 344–350. Strynar, M. J., Dickinson, M. E., et al. 2017. Fluorinated Klein, R. A. 2016. PPE, fluorochemicals and the environ- ment. Presented at the PPE and Duty of Care Forum, compounds in US fast food packaging. Environmental Birmingham, UK. Science & Technology Letters 4(3):105–111. Lang, J. R., Allred, B. M., Field, J. A., Levis, J. W., and Schultes, L., Peaslee, G. F., Brockman, J. D., Majumdar, A., Barlaz, M. A. 2017. National estimate of per- and poly- McGuinness, S. R., Wilkinson, J. T., et al. 2019. Total fluoroalkyl substance (PFAS) release to US municipal fluorine measurements in food packaging: how do cur- landfill leachate. Environmental Science & Technology rent methods perform?. Environmental Science & 51(4):2197–2205. Technology Letters 6(2):73–78. Loganathan, B. G., Sajwan, K. S., Sinclair, E., Kumar, K. S., Schultz, M. M., Higgins, C. P., Huset, C. A., Luthy, R. G., and Kannan, K. 2007. Perfluoroalkyl sulfonates and per- Barofsky, D. F., and Field, J. A. 2006. Fluorochemical fluorocarboxylates in two wastewater treatment facilities mass flows in a municipal wastewater treatment facility. in Kentucky and Georgia. Water Research 41(20): Environmental Science & Technology 40(23):7350–7357. 4611–4620. Shin, H. M., Vieira, V. M., Ryan, P. B., Detwiler, R., Mejia-Avendano, S., Munoz, G., Duy, S. V., Desrosiers, M., Sanders, B., Steenland, K., et al. 2011. Environmental fate Benoit, P., Sauve, S., et al. 2017. Novel fluoroalkylated and transport modeling for perfluorooctanoic acid emit- surfactants in soils following firefighting foam deploy- ted from the washington works facility in West Virginia. ment during the Lac-Megantic railway accident. Environmental Science & Technology 45(4):1435–1442. Environmental Science & Technology 51(15):8313–8123. Spillane, G. 2017, January 11. Cape officials file second law- Olsen, G. W., Burris, J. M., Mandel, J. H., and Zobel, L. R. suit against foam companies. Cape Cod Times. 1999. Serum perfluorooctane sulfonate and hepatic and Sun, M., Arevalo, E., Strynar, M., Lindstrom, A., lipid clinical chemistry tests in fluorochemical production Richardson, M., Kearns, B., et al. 2016. Legacy and employees. Journal of Occupational and Environmental emerging perfluoroalkyl substances are important drink- Medicine 41(9):799–806. Place, B. J., and Field, J. A. 2012. Identification of novel flu- ing water contaminants in the Cape Fear River watershed orochemicals in aqueous film-forming foams used by the of North Carolina. Environmental Science & Technology US military. Environmental Science & Technology 46: Letters 3(12):415–419. 7120–7127. (19): USEPA. 2017, January. The third unregulated contaminant Quinones, O., and Snyder, S. A. 2009. Occurrence of per- monitoring rule (UCMR 3): data summary. USEPA fluoroalkyl carboxylates and sulfonates in drinking water Office of Water. utilities and related waters from the United States. Venkatesan, A. K., and Halden, R. U. 2013. National inven- Environmental Science & Technology 43(24):9089–9095. tory of perfluoroalkyl substances in archived US biosolids Ritter, E. E., Dickinson, M. E., Harron, J. P., Lunderberg, from the 2001 EPA National Sewage Sludge Survey. D. M., DeYoung, P. A., Robel, A. E., et al. 2017. PIGE as Journal of Hazardous Materials 252:413–418.