Determination of Trihalomethanes in Drinking Water from Beijing, People’s Republic of China | Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology | Springer Nature Link Skip to main content Log in Menu Find a journal Publish with us Track your research Search Saved research Cart Home Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology Article Determination of Trihalomethanes in Drinking Water from Beijing, People’s Republic of China Published: July 2004 Volume 73 , pages 111–116, ( 2004 ) Cite this article Save article View saved research Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology Aims and scope Submit manuscript R. S. Zhao 1 , X. T. Wang 1 , A. X. Wei 1 & … X. B. Xu 1 Show authors 89 Accesses 3 Citations Explore all metrics This is a preview of subscription content, log in via an institution to check access. Access this article Log in via an institution Subscribe and save Springer+ from $39.99 /Month Starting from 10 chapters or articles per month Access and download chapters and articles from more than 300k books and 2,500 journals Cancel anytime View plans Buy Now Buy article PDF USD 39.95 Price excludes VAT (USA) Tax calculation will be finalised during checkout. Instant access to the full article PDF. Institutional subscriptions Explore related subjects Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. Disinfection Byproducts and Water Quality Management Explore related subjects Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. Disinfection Byproducts and Water Quality Management Author information Authors and Affiliations Key Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology, Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Post Office Box 2871, Beijing 100085, China R. S. Zhao, X. T. Wang, A. X. Wei & X. B. Xu Authors R. S. Zhao View author publications Search author on: PubMed Google Scholar X. T. Wang View author publications Search author on: PubMed Google Scholar A. X. Wei View author publications Search author on: PubMed Google Scholar X. B. Xu View author publications Search author on: PubMed Google Scholar Rights and permissions Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Zhao, ., Wang, ., Wei, . et al. Determination of Trihalomethanes in Drinking Water from Beijing, People’s Republic of China. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 73 , 111–116 (2004). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00128-004-0401-5 Download citation Issue date : July 2004 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1007/s00128-004-0401-5 Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Keywords Drinking Water Access this article Log in via an institution Subscribe and save Springer+ from $39.99 /Month Starting from 10 chapters or articles per month Access and download chapters and articles from more than 300k books and 2,500 journals Cancel anytime View plans Buy Now Buy article PDF USD 39.95 Price excludes VAT (USA) Tax calculation will be finalised during checkout. Instant access to the full article PDF. Institutional subscriptions Advertisement Search Search by keyword or author Search Navigation Find a journal Publish with us Track your research Discover content Journals A-Z Books A-Z Publish with us Journal finder Publish your research Language editing Open access publishing Products and services Our products Librarians Societies Partners and advertisers Our brands Springer Nature Portfolio BMC Palgrave Macmillan Apress Discover Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Your US state privacy rights Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Privacy policy Help and support Legal notice Cancel contracts here 40.65.88.222 Not affiliated © 2026 Springer Nature