Cancer Risk Assessment from Trihalomethanes in Community Water Supply at Northeastern Thailand - Volume 4 Number 5 (Oct. 2013) - International Journal of Environmental Science and Development_IJESD International Journal of Environmental Science and Development Home About IJESD Aims and Scope Indexing Services Article Processing Charge Open Access Policy Publication Ethics Editorial Process Contact us Copyright and Licensing Editorial Board Topics and Special Issues Topic 1: Sustainable Water Resource Management Topic 2: Wastewater Treatment Topic 3: Air Quality and Control Topic 4: Solid Waste Management Topic 5: Environment and Health Special Issue Guide Special Issues List Guideline Author Guideline Reviewer Guideline Editor Guideline Articles Forthcoming Issue Current Issue All Issues General Information ISSN 2010-0264(Print) 2972-3698(Online) Short Title Int. J. Environ. Sci. Dev. Frequency Bimonthly DOI 10.18178/IJESD Managing Editor Ms. Cherry L. Chen Indexing Scopus , Google Scholar , CNKI , ProQuest, EBSCO. E-mail editor@ijesd.org Submissions Download Paper Template Submission to IJESD Submission Guideline Home > Articles > All Issues > 2013 > Volume 4 Number 5 (Oct. 2013) > IJESD 2013 Vol.4(5): 538-544 ISSN: 2010-0264 DOI: 10.7763/IJESD.2013.V4.410 Cancer Risk Assessment from Trihalomethanes in Community Water Supply at Northeastern Thailand Prapat Pentamwa, Benchamaporn Sukton, Tanisa Wongklom, and Sathaporn Pentamwa Abstract —This study aims to investigate the concentration, lifetime cancer risk, and hazard index of trihalomethanes (THMs) through oral ingestion, dermal absorption and inhalation exposure from tap water of 17 community water treatment plants in northeastern Thailand. Chloroform (CHCl3) was found at highest level compared to dichlorobromomethane (CHCl2Br), chlorodibromomethane (CHClBr2) and bromoform (CHBr3) species. Results revealed that the Chongsammoe water treatment plant in Chaiyaphum province was found in the highest levels of 48.46 μg/L for total THMs whereas the levels were below the water quality guideline of WHO. Among the three pathways studies, the highest lifetime cancer risk comes from oral ingestion followed by dermal absorption and inhalation exposure route, mainly because of the exposure to CHCl3. Overall 6 of 17 plants, the lifetime cancer risk for CHCl2Br and CHCl3 through oral ingestion route were higher than risk level of 10-6 , the negligible defined by the USEPA. The average hazard index of total THMs in all muti-pathway exposure routes was lower than 1 indicating to acceptable non-carcinogenic risk level. Index Terms —Cancer risk assessment, trihalomethanes, Thailand, water supply. Prapat Pentamwa, Benchamaporn Sukton, and Tanisa Wongklom are with the School of Environmental Health, Institute of Medicine, Suranaree University of Technology, Nakorn Ratchasima, 30000 Thailand (e-mail: prapat@sut.ac.th, ben_sukton@hotmail.com, koryaa_0332@hotmail.com). Sathaporn Pentamwa is with the Health Center 5, Department of Health, Ministry of Health, Nakorn Ratchasima, 30000 Thailand (e-mail: sathapornounchit@hotmail.com). [PDF] Cite:Prapat Pentamwa, Benchamaporn Sukton, Tanisa Wongklom, and Sathaporn Pentamwa, "Cancer Risk Assessment from Trihalomethanes in Community Water Supply at Northeastern Thailand," International Journal of Environmental Science and Development vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 538-544, 2013. Previous: Measure on Eco-Efficiency of Thai Growing-Fishing Pig Farms Next: The Adsorption Study of Copper Removal by Chitosan-Coated Sludge Derived from Water Treatment Plant Article Metrics in Dimensions International Journal of Environmental Science and Development E-mail: editor@ijesd.org About IJESD Aims and Scope Indexing Services Article Processing Charge Open Access Policy Publication Ethics Editorial Process Contact us Copyright and Licensing Topics and Special Issues Topic 1: Sustainable Water Resource Management Topic 2: Wastewater Treatment Topic 3: Air Quality and Control Topic 4: Solid Waste Management Topic 5: Environment and Health Special Issue Guide Special Issues List Guideline Author Guideline Reviewer Guideline Editor Guideline Articles Forthcoming Issue Current Issue All Issues Copyright @2010-2026. International Journal of Environmental Science and Development. Unless otherwise stated. E-mail: editor@ijesd.org © 2024 IJESD. All rights reserved. --> Copyright &copy; 2008-2024. International Journal of Environmental Science and Development. All rights reserved. E-mail: editor@ijesd.org -->