Assessment of trihalomethanes in drinking water using gas chromatograp Skip to main content Taylor & Francis Group Logo T&F eBooks T&F eBooks All eBook Collections ‍ Advanced Search ‍ T&F eBooks All eBook Collections Advanced Search Login Hi, User Your Account Logout Breadcrumbs Section. Click here to navigate to respective pages. Chapter Chapter Assessment of trihalomethanes in drinking water using gas chromatography DOI link for Assessment of trihalomethanes in drinking water using gas chromatography Assessment of trihalomethanes in drinking water using gas chromatography By S.P. Aravind & P.A. Soloman Book Emerging Trends in Engineering, Science and Technology for Society, Energy and Environment Click here to navigate to parent product. Edition 1st Edition First Published 2018 Imprint CRC Press Pages 6 Share ABSTRACT ABSTRACT: Water is an essential element to sustain life. To ensure this requires a safe, adequate and accessible supply. Therefore, efforts should be made to achieve a standard drinking water quality. This is achieved through the use of water treatment plants, where the major objective is the removal of pathogenic microorganisms to prevent the spread of water-borne diseases. It is important that water treatment works be equipped with adequate disinfection systems. Disinfection processes can result in the formation of both organic and inorganic Disinfection By-Products (DBPs). The most well-known of these are the organochlorine by-products such as Trihalomethane (THM) compounds. THM concentrations in drinking water are measured using Gas Chromatography (GC) at various places in Thrissur City, including at the Government Engineering College, which has its water treated at the Peechi water treatment plant. A study has been conducted on parameters that affect the formation of THMs. Response surface designs have been created for each THM using the design of an experiment tool in Minitab 17, with the most influencing parameters being observed from parameter study. Previous Chapter Next Chapter Taylor & Francis Group Logo Policies Policies Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Cookie Policy Accessibility Journals Journals Taylor & Francis Online Corporate Corporate Taylor & Francis Group Help & Contact Help & Contact Students/Researchers Librarians/Institutions Connect with us Registered in England & Wales No. 3099067 5 Howick Place | London | SW1P 1WG © 2026 Informa UK Limited Back to Top