Water Research 168 (2020) 115145 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Water Research journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/watres Occurrence and source apportionment of novel and legacy poly/ perﬂuoroalkyl substances in Hai River basin in China using receptor models and isomeric ﬁngerprints Yao Li a, Xuemin Feng a, Jian Zhou b, Lingyan Zhu a, * a Key Laboratory of Pollution Processes and Environmental Criteria, Ministry of Education, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Environmental Remediation and Pollution Control, College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071, PR China b College of Natural Resources and Environment, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, 712100, PR China a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t Article history: A variety of ﬂuorinated alternatives are being manufactured and applied as a consequence of stringent Received 25 June 2019 regulations on legacy poly/perﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFASs). In this study, 26 emerging and legacy PFASs Received in revised form were measured in the surface water (including dissolved phase and suspended particulate matter) and 30 September 2019 P sediments taken from Hai River basin, China. The total concentrations of PFASs ( PFASs) ranged from Accepted 30 September 2019 P Available online 1 October 2019 1.74 to 172 ng/L, with perﬂuorooctanonate (PFOA) as the dominant compound (15.2% of the PFASs, median value). Emerging PFASs, such as dimer acid of hexaﬂuoropropylene oxide dimer acid (HFPO-DA) and trimer acid (HFPO-TA), were widely detected in the water samples. Speciﬁcally, chlorinated poly- Keywords: Poly/perﬂuoroalkyl substances ﬂuorinated ether sulfonate (Fe53B) was observed to be predominant in some sediment samples. A re- Receptor model ceptor model, Unmix, was introduced to identify the sources of PFASs in the surface water, and the Distribution behavior results indicated that ﬁre-ﬁghting foam/ﬂuoropolymer processing aids (36.6%) were the dominant Isomers source. The ﬁeld-based sediment-water (organic carbon normalized) coefﬁcients, Koc, were correlated to Chemical balance model the carbon chain lengths of the PFASs. A technique coupling one-way analysis of variance with chemical mass balance model was developed to trace the manufacturing sources of PFOA. Electrochemical ﬂuo- rination (ECF) was the major PFOA manufacturing source with considerable contribution by telomeri- zation. For the ﬁrst time, the isomers of perﬂuorooctane sulfonamide (PFOSA) were quantiﬁed in the environmental samples. The lower proportion of branched (br-) PFOSA isomers and higher percentage of br-perﬂuorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) isomers in the water samples relative to their corresponding com- mercial products, provided more direct evidences that br-PFOSA isomers were biotransformed more easily than n-PFOSA, explaining the observed enrichment of br-PFOS in the aquatic environment. © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 1. Introduction including decreased neonatal weight and increased incidences of liver, pancreas, and testicular tumors (Biegel et al., 2001; Cook et al., In the past six decades, per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances 1992; Grice et al., 2007). Concerns about the persistence and tox- (PFASs) have been used extensively in many industrial products icities drove government agencies and organizations to regulate or including textile coatings, surfactants, pesticide formulas, food limit the production and emission of these traditional PFAS com- contact materials, and ﬁre-ﬁghting foams (Buck et al., 2011; Calafat pounds, including PFOS and related salts (POSF), PFOA, as well as et al., 2007). Because of the unique physical and chemical stability, the long-chain perﬂuoroalkyl carboxylic acids (PFCAs) (ECHA PFASs are resistant to degradation and broadly distributed in the European Chemicals Agency, 2015; UNEP United Nations environment. Extensive studies document that several PFASs, such Environment Programme,). as perﬂuorooctanonate (PFOA) and perﬂuorooctane sulfonate The large market demand inevitably prompted the develop- (PFOS), may cause potential adverse effects on human health, ment and trade of many poly or perﬂuorinated alternatives. For example, hexaﬂuoropropylene oxide dimer acid (HFPO-DA) with the trade name “GenX”, has been widely used in ﬂuoropolymer * Corresponding author. manufactures as an alternative of PFOA, leading to its frequent E-mail address: zhuly@nankai.edu.cn (L. Zhu). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2019.115145 0043-1354/© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.