Formation and modeling of disinfection by-products in drinking water of six cities in China - Journal of Environmental Monitoring (RSC Publishing) 0.84). " name="citation_abstract" /> Jump to main content Jump to site search Publishing Journals Books Databases Search Advanced Search You must enter a search term Advanced search You do not have JavaScript enabled. Please enable JavaScript to access the full features of the site or access our non-JavaScript page . Issue 5, 2011 Previous Article Next Article From the journal: Journal of Environmental Monitoring Formation and modeling of disinfection by-products in drinking water of six cities in China Bixiong Ye , a Wuyi Wang ,* a Linsheng Yang , a Jianrong Wei b and Xueli E c Author affiliations * Corresponding authors a Institute of Geographical Sciences and Natural Resources Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China E-mail: wangwy@igsnrr.ac.cn Fax: +86-10-64889286 Tel: +86-10-64856504 b Beijing Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China c Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China Abstract Water quality parameters including TOC, UV 254 , pH, chlorine dosage, bromide concentration and disinfection by-products were measured in water samples from 41 water treatment plants of six selected cities in China. Chloroform , bromodichloromethane , dibromochloromethane , dichloroacetic acid and trichloroacetic acid were the major disinfection by-products in the drinking water of China. Bromoform and dibromoacetic acid were also detected in many water samples. Higher concentrations of trihalomethanes and haloacetic acids were measured in summer compared to winter. The geographical variations in DBPs showed that TTHM levels were higher in Zhengzhou and Tianjin than other selected cities. And the HAA5 levels were highest in Changsha and Tianjin. The modeling procedure that predicts disinfection by-products formation was studied and developed using artificial neural networks. The performance of the artificial neural networks model was excellent ( r > 0.84). You have access to this article Please wait while we load your content... Something went wrong. Try again? About Cited by Related Download options Please wait... Article information DOI https://doi.org/10.1039/C0EM00795A Article type Paper Submitted 06 Jan 2011 Accepted 25 Feb 2011 First published 18 Mar 2011 Download Citation J. Environ. Monit. , 2011, 13 , 1271-1275 BibTex EndNote MEDLINE ProCite ReferenceManager RefWorks RIS Permissions Request permissions Formation and modeling of disinfection by-products in drinking water of six cities in China B. Ye, W. Wang, L. Yang, J. Wei and X. E, J. Environ. Monit. , 2011, 13 , 1271 DOI: 10.1039/C0EM00795A To request permission to reproduce material from this article, please go to the Copyright Clearance Center request page . If you are an author contributing to an RSC publication, you do not need to request permission provided correct acknowledgement is given. If you are the author of this article, you do not need to request permission to reproduce figures and diagrams provided correct acknowledgement is given. If you want to reproduce the whole article in a third-party publication (excluding your thesis/dissertation for which permission is not required) please go to the Copyright Clearance Center request page . Read more about how to correctly acknowledge RSC content . Search articles by author Bixiong Ye Wuyi Wang Linsheng Yang Jianrong Wei Xueli E Fetching data from CrossRef. This may take some time to load. Loading related content Spotlight Advertisements rsc.org Journals, books & databases Home About us Membership & professional community Campaigning & outreach Journals, books & databases Teaching & learning News & events Locations & contacts Careers Awards & funding Advertise Help & legal Privacy policy Terms & conditions Facebook Twitter LinkedIn YouTube © Royal Society of Chemistry 2026 Registered charity number: 207890 This website collects cookies to deliver a better user experience. See how this site uses Cookies . Do not sell my personal data . Este site coleta cookies para oferecer uma melhor experiência ao usuário. Veja como este site usa Cookies . Publishing Journals Current Journals Archive Journals All Journals Books Browse Books Series For Authors and Editors About Databases Literature Updates ChemSpider The Merck Index* MarinLit More For Members For Librarians Subscribe RSS Feeds Blogs Chemistry World Education in Chemistry Open Access Historical Collection