Article pubs.acs.org/est Evidence of Remediation-Induced Alteration of Subsurface Poly- and Perﬂuoroalkyl Substance Distribution at a Former Fireﬁghter Training Area Meghan E. McGuire,† Charles Schaefer,‡ Trenton Richards, ∼ Will J. Backe,§,¥ Jennifer A. Field,⊥ Erika Houtz,∥,¤ David L. Sedlak,∥ Jennifer L. Guelfo,† Assaf Wunsch,† and Christopher P. Higgins*,† † Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Colorado School of Mines, Golden, Colorado 80401, United States ‡ CB&I Federal Services, LLC, Lawrenceville, New Jersey 08648, United States ∼ CB&I Federal Services, Inc., Denver, Colorado 80237, United States See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles. § Department of Chemistry and ⊥Department of Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331, United States ∥ Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720, United States Downloaded via FUDAN UNIV on March 13, 2026 at 06:29:02 (UTC). * S Supporting Information ABSTRACT: Poly- and perﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFASs) are a class of ﬂuorinated chemicals that are utilized in ﬁreﬁghting and have been reported in groundwater and soil at several ﬁreﬁghter training areas. In this study, soil and groundwater samples were collected from across a former ﬁreﬁghter training area to examine the extent to which remedial activities have altered the composition and spatial distribution of PFASs in the subsurface. Log Koc values for perﬂuoroalkyl acids (PFAAs), estimated from analysis of paired samples of groundwater and aquifer solids, indicated that solid/water partitioning was not entirely consistent with predictions based on laboratory studies. Diﬀerential PFAA transport was not strongly evident in the subsurface, likely due to remediation-induced conditions. When compared to the surface soil spatial distributions, the relative concentrations of perﬂuorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) and PFAA precursors in groundwater strongly suggest that remedial activities altered the subsurface PFAS distribution, presumably through signiﬁcant pumping of groundwater and transformation of precursors to PFAAs. Additional evidence for transformation of PFAA precursors during remediation included elevated ratios of perﬂuorohexanesulfonate (PFHxS) to PFOS in groundwater near oxygen sparging wells. ■ INTRODUCTION Poly- and perﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFASs) have been very resistant to chemical and biological transformation,10−15 and some PFAAs are very diﬃcult to remove from water using produced in large quantities since the 1950s.1 Some of these conventional treatment technologies.16−18 substances, such as perﬂuorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) and Until the 1990s, waste fuels and extinguishing agents (such as perﬂuorooctanoic acid (PFOA), have been detected at elevated AFFF) were employed during ﬁreﬁghter training activities and concentrations in groundwater at ﬁreﬁghter training areas2−5 as were released into the environment without treatment. These a result of repeated application of aqueous ﬁlm forming foams releases often occurred repeatedly over many years, leading to (AFFFs) during ﬁreﬁghter training exercises. AFFFs are known large amounts of contaminants (fuels, residual chlorinated to contain multiple classes of PFASs,6 and recent studies solvents, and AFFF) inﬁltrating into the subsurface. Many of document the presence of a wide variety of presumed these training sites have undergone extensive remedial activities perﬂuoroalkyl acid (PFAA) precursors as well as PFAAs such to address fuel and/or chlorinated solvent contamination, but as perﬂuorinated sulfonates and some carboxylates, in various AFFF formulations.3,7,8 Given that the concentrations of PFOS the extent to which these remedial activities have impacted and PFOA at these sites are frequently above the Provisional PFASs remains unclear. In particular, concerns have arisen Health Advisory (PHA) levels recently issued by the U.S. about the potential biological transformation of polyﬂuoroalkyl Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for drinking water (200 ng/L and 400 ng/L for PFOS and PFOA, respectively),9 Received: February 6, 2014 concerns have arisen with respect to the scope and extent of Revised: May 15, 2014 groundwater contamination at former ﬁreﬁghter training areas. Accepted: May 27, 2014 This concern is also partially driven by the fact that PFAAs are Published: May 27, 2014 © 2014 American Chemical Society 6644 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es5006187 | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 48, 6644−6652 Environmental Science & Technology Article precursors present in AFFF, which may, in fact, lead to higher transport data. Direct analysis of recently identiﬁed PFAA levels of PFAAs.3,7,15 precursors in groundwater was also performed, and a recently Given the interest in PFAA contamination at ﬁreﬁghter developed precursor oxidation assay26 was enlisted to help training areas, understanding the common characteristics of identify the extent of potential PFAA formation in the both treated and untreated AFFF-impacted sites is a pressing subsurface. Paired groundwater and aquifer solids samples need. While PFAA groundwater plumes have been detected at enabled the determination of ﬁeld-based solid−water distribu- several sites2,19,20 an extensive examination of the spatial tion coeﬃcients (i.e., apparent Kd values) for several PFAAs. By distribution of the full suite of identiﬁed PFASs at ﬁreﬁghter creating a conceptual model of the site and determining the training areas, particularly in relation to cocontaminants and extent of PFAS contamination, this approach may provide a cocontaminant remediation, has not yet been conducted. basis for determining the potential extent of contamination and PFASs are often simultaneously released with fuel components impact of remediation eﬀorts at similar sites. and chlorinated hydrocarbons, and, as a result, PFAS subsurface plumes would be expected to share some similarities with other coreleased contaminant plumes. However, diﬀerential transport ■ MATERIALS AND METHODS Site Description. The former ﬁreﬁghter training area of PFASs (relative to each other and to fuel and solvent (Figure 1) at Ellsworth Air Force Base (South Dakota, USA) components) would also be expected due to their unique sorption properties and transformation reactivities. Though laboratory-derived sorption constants have been measured for many PFAAs, and even some PFAA precursors,21−23 it is unclear how representative the laboratory-derived values are of ﬁeld conditions. Moreover, the potential in situ formation of PFAA from precursors as a result of remedial activities (e.g., biosparging) may signiﬁcantly impact the spatial distribution of PFASs in the subsurface at contaminated sites. While groundwater PFAS contamination has been docu- mented at ﬁreﬁghter training areas, little data exist on the extent of surface soil PFAS contamination at these sites. At one AFFF- impacted site in Flesland, Norway, burn pit samples had PFOS concentrations as high as 273 μg/kg.24 Current EPA soil screening levels for PFASs are quite high (16,000 μg/kg for PFOA and 6,000 μg/kg for PFOS), as they are meant to be protective of direct human exposure9 and are not necessarily protective of the ecosystem. However, the extent to which AFFF-impacted sites have soil concentrations above the EPA screening levels remains unclear. Lastly, though the focus of regulatory interest of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is primarily on the PFAAs,25 there is a growing awareness of the potential importance of PFAA precursors, which are present in AFFF. Though perﬂuorocarboxylates constitute a small fraction of the total ﬂuorochemical load in most AFFF formulations,7,8 there is strong evidence that many PFAA precursors may be trans- formed to PFAAs upon release to the environment.7 This may be particularly true if the subsurface microbial activity has been stimulated to enhance the natural attenuation of coconta- minants. Some of the aforementioned PFAA precursors have recently been detected in groundwater at AFFF-impacted sites,3,4 but their spatial distribution, particularly in relation to Figure 1. Aerial schematic of the former ﬁre training area at Ellsworth the PFAA plumes and cocontaminant plumes, remains Air Force Base. Speciﬁcally identiﬁed are the location of the former burn pit, the extents of the historical benzene plumes,36,37 the former unknown. Given their likely ability to undergo stronger site of discharge for the pump and treat system, and the two in situ sorption due to their often zwitterionic or cationic nature, reductive treatment (IRT) walls. Oxygen infusion into groundwater these PFAA precursors are expected to be signiﬁcantly less continues at the wells denoted with yellow triangles. The southeastern mobile than their transformation products.7 groundwater ﬂow is also indicated. The objective of this study was to evaluate whether site remediation activities signiﬁcantly altered the composition and distribution of PFASs at an AFFF-impacted ﬁreﬁghter training area by conducting an in-depth site assessment of groundwater is located in a semiarid climate. From 1942 to 1990 the ﬁre and soil PFAS contamination. To address this question, training area consisted of a 36.5 m diameter unlined, bermed groundwater, aquifer solids, and surface soil samples were burn pit. Typical ﬁreﬁghter training activities included collected and analyzed for select PFASs to enable the dispersing waste (contaminated) oils, solvents, and fuels until generation and analysis of plume maps. These maps were the ground was saturated, igniting, and subsequently extin- used to compare the relative distribution of contaminants at the guishing the ﬁre using various extinguishing ﬂuids such as site as well as the predicted extent based on laboratory-derived AFFF. Precipitation and/or spent fuel was allowed to pool in 6645 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es5006187 | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 48, 6644−6652 Environmental Science & Technology Article the burn pit until it either evaporated or inﬁltrated the and speciﬁc conductivity was measured continuously in situ subsurface.27 using a YSI multimeter (YSI Inc., Yellow Springs, Ohio, USA) In 1988 and 1989, a preliminary site investigation indicated until stabilized. Water samples were collected from within the that the soil, soil vapor, and groundwater were contaminated screened interval of the wells using Tygon tubing. New Tygon with volatile organic compounds (VOCs), semivolatile organic tubing was used for each sampling location and was discarded compounds (SVOCs), pesticides, hydrocarbons, chlorinated following sample collection. Four groundwater samples were solvents, and dioxin/furans.28 In 1990, ﬁreﬁghter-training collected at each location in 250 mL HDPE bottles that had activities were suspended, and the site was listed on the been rinsed with methanol and Milli-Q water. Several National Priority List (NPL). Due to the high concentrations of groundwater samples were also collected at each location and contaminants at the site, several diﬀerent remedies were utilized appropriately preserved prior to analysis for VOCs, TOC, and including soil vapor extraction (SVE), groundwater pump and inorganic cations. All soil and groundwater samples were treat, and installation of a dual phase extraction trench using shipped on ice overnight to the analytical laboratories. One various wells (Figure 1, Figure S1). Groundwater treatment, groundwater ﬁeld blank was collected during each sampling which occurred periodically from 1996 to 2011, included oil− event using Milli-Q water supplied by Colorado School of water separation, ﬁltration, air stripping, and granulated Mines (CSM) (EB-001 and EB-002). Laboratory blanks were activated carbon adsorption,29 with reinjection or surface also analyzed with each batch of water samples and used to set water discharge at various locations adjacent to the site. In the limits of quantitation (LOQ) for each analyte: the LOQ November 2011, this treatment system was shut down. The was required to provide at least twice the signal observed in any groundwater at the site is currently being treated by bioventing laboratory blank for that batch of samples. and oxygen infusion at several wells (Figure 1). Sample Analysis. Samples were analyzed for PFASs (Table In most places, the site is underlain by clay loam and gravely S1) at the CSM and the University of California at Berkeley sandy loam soils, possessing low to moderate permeability. The (UCB). The results of a subset of the groundwater samples clay, sand, and gravel overburden ranges in thickness from 3−9 analyzed at UCB were previously reported.3 Several samples m below ground surface (bgs) and is underlain directly by were also analyzed for VOCs, TOC, and inorganic cations at Pierre Shale bedrock. During the period when samples were CB&I Federal Services, LLC. Upon arrival at the laboratory, all collected, the groundwater depth was 2−8 m bgs, and samples were stored at 4 °C in the dark. At CSM, groundwater groundwater velocities at the site were estimated to range samples were analyzed for PFASs unﬁltered using a direct- from 0.12 m/year in shale or clay to 1 m/year in the fractured injection liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry shale. There are sparse and thin lenses of sand and gravel at the (LC-MS/MS) method modiﬁed from Sepulvado et al.22 Brieﬂy, site where ﬂow rates can reach 25 m/year, but most of the samples were prepared for analysis by removing an aliquot of groundwater travels at the lower rates. the groundwater (after vigorously shaking sample bottles by Sampling. Groundwater and soil samples were collected hand) and adding it to a prepared solution of 9% isopropyl during two ﬁeld sampling campaigns in October 2011 and alcohol (IPA) in Milli-Q water and a surrogate spiking solution August 2012, with all sampling locations recorded via a hand- (Table S2). Samples were then centrifuged at 17,000 RCF for held global position system (GPS; Figures S2−S4). In October 30 min and transferred to auto sampler vials for analysis. 2011, 17 temporary monitoring wells were drilled. Temporary Samples were diluted as necessary up to 100 fold. wells were installed using a direct push technology drill and Soil and aquifer solids samples were extracted as per well sampling installation system. Solid phase samples were Sepulvado et al.22 Several minor adjustments were made for collected twice during the drilling, once at 0.6 m bgs (surface analysis of samples in which high levels of PFAAs were present. soil) and again at the water table (approximately 5 m bgs; Speciﬁcally, the amount of soil extracted was decreased (limited aquifer solids). For the 17 temporary wells, each surﬁcial soil to 0.1 g), the amount of surrogate spiking solution added to the and aquifer solid sample was separately homogenized and soils was increased, and the soil extracts were diluted prior to transferred to methanol-rinsed high-density polyethylene analysis. At CSM, all groundwater and soil samples were (HDPE) bottles. Samples were also collected and preserved analyzed on an AB Sciex 3200 Tandem Mass Spectrometer (AB for VOCs,30 and total organic carbon (TOC) analyses31 Sciex, Ontario), with quantitation performed using Analyst according to standard protocols, for a subset of sampling Software (ABSciex). When analyzing both the groundwater and locations. All sampling and drilling equipment was hand- soil samples, 20% of all samples were run in triplicate. cleaned and rinsed with clean deionized water and methanol Analytical variability (expressed as percent relative standard between sampling locations. deviation) was, on average, 22% for all solid samples and 33% During the August 2012 sampling event, a hand auger was for all groundwater samples. used to collect surﬁcial soil samples 0.2−0.3 m bgs. For several At UCB, aqueous samples were processed in a manner of the 34 sampling locations, resistance was met before reaching similar to CSM. Samples were received on ice and stored at 4 0.2 m below the surface; at these locations, soil was collected at °C until analysis, which occurred within two months of depths just above the resistive layer. As before, each soil sample sampling. Groundwater samples were inverted ﬁve times to was homogenized and collected in a methanol-rinsed, HDPE ensure adequate mixing before subsampling. A 500 μL aliquot bottle. of groundwater, taken from 6 cm below the sample surface, was Groundwater samples were collected during both ﬁeld added to 500 μL of methanol in a 2 mL microcentrifuge tube. sampling campaigns, using either the newly installed temporary Samples were centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 5 min. Each wells or existing wells. Prior to sample collection, the depth to groundwater sample was initially analyzed at 2.5 times dilution, groundwater was recorded. The wells were purged using a with additional dilutions performed as needed. The analytical peristaltic or a bladder pump. To ensure samples collected were method is described in Houtz and Sedlak,26 though newly representative of the groundwater at that location, pH, identiﬁed polyﬂuorinated compounds identiﬁed by Place and temperature, oxidation−reduction potential, dissolved oxygen, Field7 (particularly ﬂuorohexanesulfonamide (FHxSA), 6:2 6646 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es5006187 | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 48, 6644−6652 Environmental Science & Technology Article Figure 2. Extents of surface soil PFAA contamination for (A) PFHxA, (B) PFOA, and (C) PFOS. Yellow symbols represent soil sample locations, and red lines illustrate the bounds of the data. ﬂuorotelomer sulfonate (6:2 FtS), and 8:2 ﬂuorotelomer Methods 5310 B, C, and D. These methods use high sulfonate (8:2 FtS; Table S1)) were added to the analytical temperature combustion (method B), persulfate, and/or UV protocol and measured.3 All samples were analyzed in (methods C and D), depending on the amount of TOC in the duplicate. sample.32 Groundwater samples analyzed for VOCs were Of particular interest in understanding the relative shipped to the laboratory in 40 mL glass vials with importance of PFAA precursors at AFFF-impacted sites is the polytetraﬂuoroethylene lined screw caps, with HCl as a advent of a novel characterization technique whereby PFAA preservative. Groundwater samples were also analyzed for precursors are transformed by oxidation with hydroxyl radical inorganic ions using ion chromatography as outlined in EPA to more easily measured perﬂuorocarboxylates.26 When applied Method 300.33 to a series of spatially varied groundwater samples, this Spatial Analysis and Modeling. Concentration maps of technique may enable a preliminary delineation of a “precursor” the various PFASs were created from results of groundwater, plume, even if those PFAA precursors cannot be directly surface soil, and aquifer solids analyses using GPS data. measured. To this end, UCB also oxidized groundwater Kriging34 interpolation of concentrations between sampling samples with hydroxyl radical to convert precursors in the locations, and subsequent contour maps, was created using aqueous samples to perﬂuorocarboxylates, as described in Surfer 11 (Golden Software, Golden, Colorado, USA), with Houtz et al.3 Duplicate 3 mL aliquots of each sample were base maps provided through ArcGIS (ESRI, Redlands, diluted by 50% in a persulfate and NaOH stock solution in 7 California, USA). The interpolated spatial distributions of mL HDPE tubes. Samples were transferred to vials containing PFAAs in the ﬁeld were compared to predictive contaminant 60 mM potassium persulfate and 125 mM NaOH and were transport simulations. Limited numerical simulations of PFAA reacted for 6 h at 85 °C. Samples were brought to room transport in a simulated aquifer were carried out with temperature, neutralized with concentrated HCl to a pH value HYDRUS-2D,34 using laboratory-derived sorption constants between 4 and 10, and amended with 1 mL of methanol to and modeling parameters chosen to be representative of the enhance dissolution of PFASs. An aliquot of each reacted hydrology at the site. Additional details on the modeling of the solution was removed for LC-MS/MS analysis. The total simulated aquifer can be found in the Supporting Information. precursor concentration for each sample was estimated by the sum of the perﬂuorocarboxylates produced upon oxidation or the diﬀerence between the concentration of perﬂuorocarbox- ■ RESULTS Surface Soil. For most PFAAs, surface soil (0−0.6 m bgs) ylates before and after oxidation. contamination was primarily centered around the former burn VOCs in soil samples were determined using EPA Method pit (i.e., the historical source zone; Figure 2 and Figure S5), 5035 with a methanol extraction. Soil samples were then although elevated concentrations of most PFAAs were apparent analyzed using EPA Method 5030; this method combines an across a much broader area. PFOS surface soil levels reached aliquot of the extract from 5035 with organic-free reagent water 36,000 μg/kg around the burn pit (Table S3). The spatial in the purging chamber and is then analyzed by purge-and-trap distribution of PFAAs was similar to the reported spatial GC/MS.32 VOC concentrations in groundwater samples were distributions of fuel hydrocarbons in the surface soil during the analyzed using EPA Method 8260, which analyzes for VOCs original remedial investigation in 1993.28 Surface soil using a purge-and-trap GC/MS.30 Groundwater and soil contamination was similar for the majority of the PFAAs; samples were analyzed for organic carbon content using EPA high concentrations in the surface soil seemed to be contained 6647 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es5006187 | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 48, 6644−6652 Environmental Science & Technology Article Figure 3. PFAA contamination in groundwater of (A) PFHxA, (B) PFOA, and (C) PFOS. Dashed red lines illustrate the bounds of the data, dashed white lines indicate the extent of the historic (2002) benzene plume, blue circles represent groundwater sample locations, and yellow triangles represent current oxygen infusion wells. Figure 4. Evidence of PFAA precursors and precursor transformation potential in groundwater: (A) total molar concentration of PFAA precursors measured by the oxidation assay, (B) FHxSA, a C6 sulfonamide; and (C) the ratio of PFHxS to PFOS. Blue dots represent the location of groundwater samples, yellow triangles show the location of oxygen infusion, and red lines show the bounds of the data. to the burn pit area. Several soil samples at the site were also (Figure S6) was similar to the areal extent of contamination in analyzed for VOCs and organic carbon content (Tables S4− the groundwater (Figure 3, Figure S7). High PFAA levels were S5) in addition to PFAAs. Surface soil samples showed high observed in aquifer solids near the burn pit. However, with the levels of VOCs in the burn pit area, as would be expected. The exception of PFBA, the highest levels (Table S6) were observed fraction of organic carbon ( foc) of the surface soil samples downgradient from the burn pit (Sample S10D; Figure S6) and ranged from about 0.6% to 5.5%, with higher concentrations in the burn pit area (Table S5). very close to the center of the current benzene groundwater Aquifer Solids. Solids samples were also collected at the plume. Analysis of the aquifer solids suggested that most of the water table during the installation of the temporary monitoring mass of PFAAs remains within the existing (as of 2011) wells. The areal extent of contamination of the aquifer solids benzene groundwater plume. The notable exception was PFOS, 6648 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es5006187 | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 48, 6644−6652 Environmental Science & Technology Article for which the elevated aquifer solids concentrations extended to Table 1. Field-Based Partition Coeﬃcients and Ranges for the east of the benzene plume (Figure S6). PFAAs Included in This Study Groundwater. Similarly to the spatial distribution of PFAAs av log Kd log Kd av log Koc log Koc log Koc in aquifer solids, most of the contamination of PFAAs in analyte (±SD, n = 7) range (±SD, n = 7) range (lit.) groundwater was located within the historical benzene plume PFBA −0.25 ± 0.87 −1.64− 2.17 ± 1.10 0.55− 1.8823 (Figure S7). However, while PFOS was present in high 0.84 3.45 concentrations within the benzene plume, the highest PFOS PFPeA −0.57 ± 0.62 −1.42− 1.85 ± 0.70 0.99− 1.3723 concentrations in groundwater were found to the east of the 0.23 2.84 burn pit (Figure 3C; Table S7). In addition, based on the PFHxA −0.36 ± 0.59 −1.16− 2.06 ± 0.67 1.33− 1.91,22 relative extent of the groundwater plumes alone, there was no 0.40 3.01 1.31,23 strong evidence for diﬀerential transport of diﬀerent chain- PFHpA −0.37 ± 0.46 −1.05− 2.04 ± 0.48 1.34− 2.19,22 0.17 2.71 1.63,23 length perﬂuorocarboxylates or perﬂuorinated sulfonates, which PFOA −0.19 ± 0.47 −0.68− 2.22 ± 0.71 1.33− 2.06,21 are known to undergo chain-length dependent sorption.21,23 0.52 3.13 2.31,22 For example, the results of the HYDRUS-2D modeling (Figure 1.8923 S8) indicate that PFHxA should have traveled farther and has a PFBS −0.36 ± 0.64 −1.08− 2.06 ± 0.77 1.11− 1.7923 0.46 3.07 larger plume distribution than PFOA 22 years after releases PFHxS −0.14 ± 0.53 −0.80− 2.28 ± 0.70 1.30− 2.7,22 have ceased due to its weaker sorptive potential. 0.61 3.22 2.05,23 Groundwater PFAA Precursor Plumes. Whether meas- PFOS 0.72 ± 0.49 0.16− 3.14 ± 0.66 2.28− 2.57,21 ured directly or indirectly through the oxidative precursor assay 1.58 4.19 3.34,22 (Table S8), a delineation of potential PFAA precursors can 2.8023 provide an indication as to the zones in which concentrations of PFAAs could increase without new AFFF releases. As seen in Figure 4A, the area with the highest total PFAA precursor trends for the perﬂuorocarboxylates was even apparent when concentration was to the east of the burn pit, the same area results were limited to log Koc values determined from where high PFOS groundwater concentrations were seen. This individual wells (Table S9). Given the general consistency of pattern was even more evident when the formation potential of chain-length dependent trends in the laboratory and modeling individual perﬂuorocarboxylates (i.e., ΔPFHxA, ΔPFHpA) studies, these data suggest that the ﬁeld-based data for the were mapped (Figure S9), though the formation potential of perﬂuorocarboxylates may potentially be biased due to the the shortest carboxylate measured (ΔPFBA) was also elevated presence of perﬂuorocarboxylate precursors. For example, if within the benzene plume. However, this eastern PFAS source perﬂuorocarboxylate precursors were chemisorbed to the zone became evident again when the spatial distribution of organic matter within the solid phase and were sensitive to speciﬁc precursors were examined (Figure 4B, Figure S10). base-catalyzed hydrolysis, then the measured solid phase Relationships between Soil and Groundwater. Field- concentrations of certain perﬂuorocarboxylates might have based solid−water distribution coeﬃcients (Kd values) were been slightly elevated relative to what should have been in calculated for a limited number of sample pairs based on equilibrium with the aqueous phase due to the basic methanol availability of groundwater and aquifer solids data (Table S9). extraction process (resulting in an artiﬁcially high Koc value). These values were calculated from the measured soil This is supported by the fact that the only paired samples that concentrations (adjusted for moisture content and resultant were somewhat consistent with chain length trends (i.e., Δ log aqueous PFAA levels) and measured groundwater concen- Koc of ∼1 between PFHxA and PFOA at Tmp 11; Table S9) trations. The resulting log Kd values (L/kgdw) from seven also had minimal levels of precursors, as measured by the locations were also normalized to the fraction of organic carbon oxidation assay (Table S8). While somewhat speculative, these of the soil ( foc) to obtain Koc (L/kgoc) values. The average log data represent one of the ﬁrst suggestions as to the important Kd values and average log Koc values are presented in Table 1, as role of PFAA precursors in the distribution of PFAAs in the are the ranges of values observed. For these samples, foc values subsurface at AFFF-impacted sites. Alternatively, the lack of ranged from 0.00121 to 0.0135 and reﬂect any organic carbon clear trends for the perﬂuorocarboxylates may have been due to associated with any organic contaminants in the soil (i.e., a lack of equilibrium between the two phases, though this is less nonaqueous phase liquids; NAPLs) in addition to naturally likely for the shorter chain perﬂuorocarboxylates than the occurring organic carbon, although these levels are quite low in perﬂuorosulfonates.36 comparison to the total foc. Others have observed an impact of Spatial Groundwater Plume Comparisons. Consistent NAPLs and other cocontaminants on the sorption potential of with the lack of clear trends in the log Koc data for the PFAAs, though eﬀects are dependent on soil type, the type of perﬂuorocarboxylates, despite laboratory-based evidence for PFAA, and the level of the PFAA.22 ■ diﬀerential sorption of PFAAs depending on the chain- length,21,22 there was no strong evidence for diﬀerential DISCUSSION transport of PFAAs in the groundwater (Figure 3, Figure S7). Field-Based Koc Values. The ﬁeld-based log Koc values Indeed, for most of the PFAAs investigated at this site, elevated determined in this study are, to the best of our knowledge, the levels in the groundwater could be roughly approximated by the ﬁrst ﬁeld-based log Koc values determined for PFAAs. While the location of the historical (and/or current) benzene plume trends within the perﬂuorinated sulfonates (i.e., Δ log Koc of (Figure 1). For comparison, the HYDRUS-2D simulations for ∼0.9 between PFHxS and PFOS; Table 1) were consistent with PFHxA and PFOA transport based on advection and dispersion previously observed chain-length dependent trends,21,23,35,36 alone are presented in Figure S8. The ∼4 fold diﬀerence in there were some inconsistencies between the trends in the ﬁeld- their Kd values should have led, under ideal conditions, to a ∼2 derived average log Koc values for the perﬂuorocarboxylates and fold diﬀerence in their plume centers of mass after 22 years of previous observations. The lack of clear chain-length dependent transport following 25 years of continual release (Figure S8c,d). 6649 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es5006187 | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 48, 6644−6652 Environmental Science & Technology Article Instead, both PFHxA and PFOA plumes mostly overlapped of aerobic transformations of some PFAA precursors, are not (Figure 3). elevated in this area. In contrast, many PFAA precursors, such Importantly, most PFAA groundwater plumes were spatially as FHxSA and the FtSs (which are generally considered similar to the historical benzene plume. These data initially intermediate degradation products of AFFF-components), are suggest that sampling existing monitoring wells within still present in this area, suggesting some partial transformation cocontaminant fuel plumes may provide a very good indication of AFFF components has occurred. As the transport potential as to the center of mass for most PFAA groundwater plumes at of both PFOS and PFAA precursors is generally expected to be AFFF-impacted ﬁreﬁghter training areas. This is corroborated signiﬁcantly less7,22 than many of the perﬂuorocarboxylates, the by the aquifer solids data, which indicated elevated concen- fact that extensive pumping occurred within the main benzene trations both within and to the east of the existing benzene plume would suggest that the relative levels of PFOS in the plume (Figure S5). However, the PFOS data and the precursor main benzene plume should be elevated, at least compared to data strongly suggest that a conceptual model of colocated the perﬂuorocarboxylates, if PFOS and the perﬂuorocarbox- PFAA and cocontaminant (i.e., benzene) plumes is overly ylates were coreleased. Given that the opposite is true (i.e., the simplistic. perﬂuorinated carboxylate signal is relatively stronger in the Spatial Surface Soil Distributions. Elevated concen- area subjected to extensive pumping), this suggests releases of trations of PFAAs around the burn pit area were expected in PFOS and the perﬂuorocarboxylates to the groundwater was surface soil due to direct application of AFFF at this location. not cotemporaneous. Though the soils in the burn pit area were treated with SVE to This alternative explanation would, in fact, suggest that the remove VOCs and SVOCs from the vadose zone, these levels of perﬂuorocarboxylates in the subsurface, particularly technologies likely did not result in decreased PFAA levels within the current benzene plume, are primarily a result of the (though historical soil samples for PFAA analysis are not in situ transformation of less mobile PFAA precursors to the available). While contaminated groundwater at AFFF-impacted perﬂuorocarboxylates within the benzene plume. In situ sites will likely be the primary risk driver (as opposed to generation and “release” of perﬂuorocarboxylates would also contaminated soil), eﬀects on wildlife, possibly as a result of help explain why there is no strong evidence for their contaminated soil and water, are worth considering in light of diﬀerential transport: diﬀering rates of in situ generation previous studies.37−39 Moreover, the disconnect between the could potentially blur any diﬀerential perﬂuorinated carboxylate surface soil and groundwater spatial distributions of PFOS transport signal. This second potential explanation is important, (Figure 2C and Figure 3C) again suggests that remedial in that it implies that the groundwater PFAS levels and activities have altered the PFAA composition and distributions composition in this eastern zone (relatively high PFOS, high in the subsurface. PFAA precursors, low perﬂuorocarboxylates) are representative Likely Explanations for the Spatial Distribution of of the initial (i.e., preremediation) conditions at the site, PFOS and PFAA Precursors in Groundwater. While several whereas the levels within the current benzene plume are things could possibly explain the spatial distributions observed primarily a result of the various remedial activities conducted at at Ellsworth AFB, we suggest two possible explanations for the the site. spatial patterns observed in the aquifer solids PFOS data The potential for alteration in PFAS signals in groundwater (Figure S5), groundwater PFOS data (Figure 3C), the total due to remedial activities is most clearly illustrated in Figure PFAA precursors data (Figure 4A), and the chemical-speciﬁc 4C. In this ﬁgure, the spatial distribution of the ratio of PFHxS precursor data (i.e., FxHSA; Figure 4B). The ﬁrst possible to PFOS in groundwater is plotted, and a signiﬁcant increase in explanation is that there was a second spatial source of PFASs the ratio (up to 50:1) is observed. Analysis of AFFF containing to the subsurface (in addition to the corelease with the fuel these compounds suggests the ratio in the AFFF itself was within the burn pit). Given the higher concentrations, this closer to 1:10, though some variation over the years and would likely be a repeated release scenario, perhaps related to formulations is expected.3,4 If diﬀerential transport was the ﬁreﬁghter training activities. For example, cleaning of occurring (average log Koc for PFHxS is 2.28 vs 3.14 for AFFF-contaminated equipment might have occurred in a PFOS; Table 1), the ratio would be expected to increase second location outside of the burn pit. This is not supported, (continually) downgradient.23 Instead, the ratio increases however, by the surface soil data. No elevated surface soil downgradient from the burn pit and then decreases. concentrations are observed in this area (Figure 2), though Alternatively, if in situ generation of PFHxS was occurring, historical data from the site suggest there may have been this could also lead to an increase in the PFHxS:PFOS ratio. surface ﬁll placed in this area,34 potentially masking a surface Given the near absence of at least one suspected PFHxS soil signal. precursor in this area (Figure 4B) and the fact that this area of An alternative explanation for the eastern source zone, and elevated PFHxS:PFOS ratios is in the immediate vicinity of the one with important implications, is that hydrologic and wells where signiﬁcant oxygen infusion has occurred (Figure 1), biogeochemical alterations to the subsurface as a result of the in situ generation of PFHxS from PFAA precursors due to remediation activities are responsible for the current spatial aerobic biological processes is the likely explanation, though PFAS distribution. This explanation hinges on the fact that this more research is needed to verify this expected change in ratios eastern area was initially also contaminated with benzene,28 as a result of AFFF degradation. It should be noted that FOSA, though the present plume boundary now excludes this area. In the PFOS analogue to FHxSA, has been shown to form PFOS addition, neither signiﬁcant pumping of groundwater nor under aerobic (activated sludge) conditions.35 In addition, it is stimulation of subsurface microbial populations through oxygen possible that this presumed production of PFHxS from infusion appears to have occurred in this eastern area (Figure precursors could have occurred naturally as a result of natural S1): both types of activities have occurred in the main benzene attenuation of the precursors in the groundwater, though the plume. The lack of oxygen infusion in this eastern area may biosparging would likely have accelerated this presumably explain why the perﬂuorocarboxylates, likely terminal products aerobic process. 6650 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es5006187 | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 48, 6644−6652 Environmental Science & Technology Article Implications. If the hydrological and biogeochemical (6) Schultz, M. M.; Barofsky, D. F.; Field, J. A. Quantitative explanation of the inconsistencies in the PFOS contamination, determination of fluorotelomer sulfonates in groundwater by LC MS/ spatial distribution of PFHxS:PFOS ratios, and the distribution MS. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2004, 38, 1828−35. of aqueous PFAA precursors is valid, this has major (7) Place, B. J.; Field, J. A. Identification of novel fluorochemicals in implications with respect to AFFF-impacted sites. Notably, aqueous film-forming foams used by the US military. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012, 46, 10859. this would imply that the elevated PFOS levels to the east of (8) D’Agostino, L. A.; Mabury, S. A. Identification of novel the burn pit may be more representative of conditions at a site fluorinated surfactants in aqueous film forming foams and commercial that has not undergone remediation. Moreover, the PFAA surfactant concentrates. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 48, 121−129. precursor and perﬂuorocarboxylate data from this area of the (9) U.S. EPA Soil Screening Levels for Perﬂuorooctanaoic Acid (PFOA) site would suggest that simply analyzing groundwater samples and Perﬂuorooctyl Sulfonate (PFOS); 2009. for perﬂuorocarboxylates (and not employing the assay (10) Key, B. D.; Howell, R. D.; Criddle, C. S. Fluorinated organics in developed by Houtz et al.3) would obscure the actual potential the biosphere. Environ. Sci. Technol. 1997, 31, 2445−2454. for perﬂuorocarboxylate contamination, particularly for a site (11) Key, B.; Howell, R.; Criddle, C. Defluorination of organo- that has not undergone remediation. This latter point is fluorine sulfur compounds by Pseudomonas Sp. Strain D2. Environ. Sci. particularly crucial as additional AFFF-impacted sites are Technol. 1998, 2283−2287. investigated with respect to PFAS contamination. (12) Król, B.; Prochaska, K.; Chrzanowski, Ł. Biodegradability of ■ firefighting foams. Fire Technol. 2010, 48, 173−181. (13) Remde, A.; Debus, R. Biodegradibility of fluorinated surfactants ASSOCIATED CONTENT under aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Chemosphere 1996, 32, 1563− * S Supporting Information 1574. Figures S1−S10 and Tables S1−S9. This material is available (14) Parsons, J. R.; Sáez, M.; Dolﬁng, J.; De Voogt, P. Biodegradation free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org. of perﬂuorinated compounds. Rev. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 2008, ■ 196. (15) Wang, N.; Liu, J.; Buck, R. C.; Korzeniowski, S. H.; AUTHOR INFORMATION Wolstenholme, B. W.; Folsom, P. W.; Sulecki, L. M. 6:2 Fluorotelomer Corresponding Author sulfonate aerobic biotransformation in activated sludge of waste water *E-mail: chiggins@mines.edu. treatment plants. Chemosphere 2011, 82, 853−8. (16) Takagi, S.; Adachi, F.; Miyano, K.; Koizumi, Y.; Tanaka, H.; Present Addresses ¥ Watanabe, I.; Tanabe, S.; Kannan, K. Fate of perfluorooctanesulfonate Minnesota Department of Health, St. Paul, MN 55164, United and perfluorooctanoate in drinking water treatment processes. Water States. Res. 2011, 45, 3925−32. ¤ Environmental Chemistry Laboratory, California Department (17) Quiñones, O.; Snyder, S. A. Occurrence of perfluoroalkyl of Toxic Substances Control, Berkeley, CA 94710, United carboxylates and sulfonates in drinking water utilities and related States. waters from the United States. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2009, 43, 9089− Notes 95. (18) Appleman, T.; Higgins, C.; Quinones, O.; Zeigler, J.; The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest. ■ Vanderford, B. J.; Kolstad, C.; Dickenson, E. Treatment of poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances in U.S. full-scale water treatment systems. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Water Res. 2014, 51, 246−255. The authors thank the Air Force Center for Engineering and (19) Moody, C.; Hebert, G.; Strauss, S.; Field, J. Occurrence and the Environment (BAA 689) and the Strategic Environmental persistence of perfluorooctanesulfonate and other perfluorinated Research and Development Program (SERDP ER2126 and ER surfactants in groundwater at a fire-training area at Wurtsmith Air 2128) for ﬁnancial support for this project as well as the NSF Force Base, Michigan, USA. J. Environ. Monit. 2003, 5, 341−345. (20) Moody, C. A.; Field, J. A. Perfluorinated Surfactants and the CO-AMP Bridge to the Doctorate Fellowship at the Colorado Environmental Implications of Their Use in Fire-Fighting Foams. School of Mines. In addition, the authors thank Dr. Kaneen Environ. Sci. Technol. 2000, 34, 3864−3870. Christensen for help with sampling and Lisa Kudryk and Dr. (21) Higgins, C. P.; Luthy, R. G. Sorption of perfluorinated Derrick Rodriguez for help with spatial analysis. surfactants on sediments. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2006, 40, 7251−6. ■ REFERENCES (1) Prevedouros, K.; Cousins, I.; Buck, R. C.; Korzeniowski, S. (22) Sepulvado, J. G.; Blaine, A. C.; Hundal, L. S.; Higgins, C. P. Occurrence and fate of perfluorochemicals in soil following the land application of municipal biosolids. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2011, 45, Sources, fate and transport of perﬂuorocarboxylates. Environ. Sci. 8106−12. Technol. 2006, 40. (23) Guelfo, J. L.; Higgins, C. P. Subsurface transport potential of (2) Moody, C. A.; Field, J. A. Determination of perfluorocarboxylates perfluoroalkyl acids at aqueous film-forming foam (AFFF)-impacted in groundwater impacted by fire-fighting activity. Environ. Sci. Technol. sites. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2013, 47, 4164−71. 1999, 33, 2800−2806. (24) Kärrman, A.; Elgh-Dalgren, K. Environmental levels and (3) Houtz, E. F.; Higgins, C. P.; Field, J. A.; Sedlak, D. L. Persistence distribution of structural isomers of perfluoroalkyl acids after aqueous of perfluoroalkyl acid precursors in AFFF-impacted groundwater and fire-fighting foam (AFFF) contamination. Environ. Chem. 2011, 8, soil. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2013, 47, 8187−8195. 372−380. (4) Backe, W. J.; Day, T. C.; Field, J. A. Zwitterionic, cationic, and (25) U.S. EPA 2011. Revisions to the Unregulated Contaminant anionic fluorinated chemicals in aqueous film forming foam Monitoring Regulation (UCMR 3) for Public Water Systems formulations and groundwater from U.S. military bases by nonaqueous Proposed rule. Fed. Regist. 2011, 76, 11713−11737. large-volume injection. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2013, 47, 5226−5234. (26) Houtz, E. F.; Sedlak, D. L. Oxidative conversion as a means of (5) Morten, M. K.; Huber, S.; Svenson, J.; Hagenaars, A.; Pabon, M.; detecting precursors to perfluoroalkyl acids in urban runoff. Environ. Trümper, M.; Berger, U.; Dries Knapen, D. H. The structure of the fire Sci. Technol. 2012, 46, 9342−9. fighting foam surfactant Forafac®1157 and its biological and (27) U.S Army Corps of Engineers Installation Restoration Program, photolytic transformation products. Chemosphere 2012, 89, 869−887. Phase II, Stage I, Ellsworth Air Force Base; 1988. 6651 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es5006187 | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 48, 6644−6652 Environmental Science & Technology Article (28) USAF Remedial Investigation Report - Operable Unit 01; Ellsworth Air Force Base, SD, 1994. (29) USAF Record of Decision for Remedial Action at Operable Unit 1; Ellsworth Air Force Base, SD, 1996. (30) U.S. EPA Method 8260 1996. (31) U.S. EPA Method 9060 - Total Organic Carbon 2004. (32) U.S. EPA Method 5030 1996. (33) U.S. EPA Method 300.0 1993. (34) Oliver, M.; Webster, R. Kriging: a method of interpolation for geographical information systems. Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Syst. 1990, 4. (35) Goss, K.; Bronner, G.; Harner, T.; Hertel, M.; Schmidt, T. The partition behavior of fluorotelomer alcohols and olefins. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2006, 40, 3572−3577. (36) Guelfo, J. L.; Wunsch, A.; McCray, J. E.; Higgins, C. P. Transport potential of perﬂuoroalkyl acids (PFAAs) at AFFF-impacted sites: column experiments and modeling. Manuscript in preparation. (37) Newsted, J. L.; Coady, K. K.; Beach, S. A.; Butenhoff, J. L.; Gallagher, S.; Giesy, J. P. Effects of perfluorooctane sulfonate on mallard and northern bobwhite quail exposed chronically via the diet. Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2007, 23, 1−9. (38) Oakes, K.; Benskin, J. P.; Martin, J.; Ings, J.; Heinrichs, J.; Dixon, D.; Servos, M. Biomonitoring of perfluorochemicals and toxicity to the downstream fish community of Etobicoke Creek following deploy- ment of aqueous film-forming foam. Aquat. Toxicol. 2010, 98, 120− 129. (39) Custer, C. M.; Custer, T. W.; Dummer, P. M.; Etterson, M. A.; Thogmartin, W. E.; Wu, Q.; Kannan, K.; Trowbridge, A.; McKann, P. C. Exposure and effects of perfluoroalkyl substances in tree swallows nesting in Minnesota and Wisconsin, USA. Arch. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 2014, 66, 120−138. 6652 dx.doi.org/10.1021/es5006187 | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 48, 6644−6652