Spatial and temporal evaluations of disinfection by-products in drinking water distribution systems in Beijing, China - ScienceDirect JavaScript is disabled on your browser. Please enable JavaScript to use all the features on this page. Skip to main content Skip to article ScienceDirect Journals & Books Help Search shuo zhang View PDF Download full issue Search ScienceDirect Science of The Total Environment Volume 408, Issue 20 , 15 September 2010 , Pages 4600-4606 Spatial and temporal evaluations of disinfection by-products in drinking water distribution systems in Beijing, China Author links open overlay panel Jianrong Wei a , Bixiong Ye b , Wuyi Wang b , Linsheng Yang b , Jing Tao a , Zhiyu Hang a Show more Add to Mendeley Share Cite https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2010.06.053 Get rights and content Full text access Abstract Disinfection by-products were determined in 15 water treatment plants in Beijing City. The effects of different water sources (surface water source, mixture water source and ground water source), seasonal variation and spatial variation were examined. Trihalomethanes and haloacetic acids were the major disinfection by-products found in all treated water samples, which accounted for 42.6% and 38.1% of all disinfection by-products respectively. Other disinfection by-products including haloacetonitriles, chloral hydrate, haloketones and chloropicrin were usually detected in treated water samples but at lower concentrations. The levels of disinfection by-products in drinking water varied with different water sources and followed the order: surface water source > mixture water source > ground water source. High spatial and seasonal variation of disinfection by-products in the drinking water of Beijing was shown as a result. Previous article in issue Next article in issue Keywords Drinking water Disinfection by-products Spatial and seasonal variations Loading... Recommended articles Cited by (0) View Abstract Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. Recommended articles Loading... About ScienceDirect Remote access Contact and support Terms and conditions Privacy policy Cookie settings All content on this site: Copyright © 2026 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply.